           information
Article
A Social Multi-Agent Cooperation System Based on
Planning and Distributed Task Allocation
Atef Gharbi 1,2
 1    Faculty of Computing and Information Technology, Northern Border University, Rafha 91911, Saudi Arabia;
      atef.gharbi@nbu.edu.sa
 2    LISI, INSAT, Université de Carthage, Carthage 1054, Tunisia
                                                                                                     
 Received: 3 March 2020; Accepted: 14 May 2020; Published: 18 May 2020                               


 Abstract: Planning and distributed task allocation are considered challenging problems. To address
 them, autonomous agents called planning agents situated in a multi-agent system should cooperate
 to achieve planning and complete distributed tasks. We propose a solution for distributed task
 allocation where agents dynamically allocate the tasks while they are building the plans. We model
 and verify some properties using computation tree logic (CTL) with the model checker its-ctl. Lastly,
 simulations are performed to verify the effectiveness of our proposed solution. The result proves
 that it is very efficient as it requires little message exchange and computational time. A benchmark
 production system is used as a running example to explain our contribution.

 Keywords: distributed task allocation; multi-agent system; planning agent; computation tree logic
 (CTL); model checker




1. Introduction
      Distributed artificial intelligence (DAI) is classified under two umbrellas: the distributed system
and the multi-agent system (MAS). In the distributed system, the focus is on independent intelligent
components working together to resolve a problem [1–4]. In the multi-agent system, the autonomous
components are called agents [5–8]. Indeed, the multi-agent system is considered very important as it
combines artificial intelligence with the distributed system [9–11]. In the MAS, it is evident that there
is no central control; each agent has its own independence as well as its own resources to achieve a
goal [12–14]. This paper deals with distributed agents, where each one has to interact with the other to
maximize the number of successfully distributed tasks [15,16]. We are interested in the agents having
the following characteristics: (i) cooperative (no opponents), (ii) likely to be self-interested, (iii) have
reliable communication, (iv) heterogeneous, (v) have the possibility to join and leave unpredictably,
and (vi) must complete tasks as soon as possible [17–20]. In many of the existing studies, one or more
of the above assumptions are violated.
      To ensure cooperation between agents in a multi-agent system, planning is needed, which leads
to more complications. We distinguish the following five phases to establish multi-agent planning:
(i) goal allocation to agents, (ii) goal refinement into subtasks, (iii) subtask scheduling, (iv) planning
communication, and (v) plan execution. Agent-based planning is considered as a single agent task [21–23].
      In this paper, we consider a multi-agent cooperation system based on planning and distributed
task allocation, which is based on the following steps: (1) agent-based planning, (2) formal specification
and verification, and (3) evaluation.
      Our main contribution in this paper is as follows. Firstly, we define the planning agents based on
planning by making action decisions that combines deliberation and reactivity. Secondly, we determine
the distributed task allocation applied by planning agents. To ensure the distributed task allocation’s
correctness, we specify it with a Petri net and we verify some properties using computation tree logic.


Information 2020, 11, 271; doi:10.3390/info11050271                          www.mdpi.com/journal/information
Information 2020, 11, 271                                                                            2 of 21



The formal verification of some properties expressed in computation Tree logic (CTL) are proven to be
true by the appropriate model checker tool.
     The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the related work. Section 3
introduces a simple benchmark production system to be used throughout this article to demonstrate
our contribution. Section 4 describes the agent-based planning in detail. In Section 5, we present the
distributed task allocation. Section 6 demonstrates the obtained performance gain with our solution in
comparison with the others. Finally, the conclusions and future work are summarized in Section 7.

2. Related Work
     Task allocation is considered as a problem of allocating autonomous agents to a set of tasks having
some specific properties such as priority, execution time, constraints, etc. When an agent Agi has a task
and cannot execute it properly, then the agent Agi tries to find other agents that can execute this task
and assigns the task to a particular one. According to [24], the tasks in the multi-agent system can be
categorized into the following classes:

(i)   Spatially organizing behavior: in this system, the agents interact among themselves to execute a
      spatial configuration and have minimal interaction with the environment;
(ii) Collective explorations: in this system, the agents focus rather on interacting with the environment
      than among themselves;
(iii) Cooperative decision making: in this system, the agents interact among themselves as well as
      with the environment to complete a complicated task.

     In this paper, we are interested in cooperative decision making, which can be divided into three
categories: centralized, distributed or combined task allocation approaches.
     The centralized task allocation approach is characterized by a top-down hierarchical topology
where a central server plays a particular role as a coordinator between all agents (like in the blackboard
model) [25]. This solution achieves the best possible task allocation solution, but it is not suitable for a
large scale of tasks due to the huge computation in the server.
     The distributed task allocation approach means that all the agents must cooperate together to find
a convenient task allocation solution in the whole system [26–28]. It is considered as a solution to avoid
the risk of central server deficiency (i.e., each agent is completely autonomous from the other agents).
This solution is more scalable and robust but raises the communication overhead of the agents.
     A combined task allocation approach benefits from the two precedent solutions, which means it
uses centralized information and does not have any point of failure. However, this solution is not easy
to implement and can only be applied to a very specific system (such as a manufacturing system).
     In this work, the distributed task allocation approach is adopted. However, our method is still
valid for a centralized solution. Many solutions have been employed in distributed task allocation such
as the market-based approach, the contract net protocol (CNP), threshold-based algorithms, coalition
formation and teamwork.
     The market-based approach [29] uses a market-like mechanism where the consumers get the
resources needed after negotiation with the providers. This solution is good, but it differs from our
solution as it leads to a huge number of exchanged messages due to a large number of providers.
     The contract net protocol [30,31] is well used, especially in a multi-agent system. The principle is
imitating the economic behavior of the “announce—bidding—award” mechanism. It is based on four
steps: (1) task announcement—when an agent needs a task, it announces it to the others (called auction
agent); (2) task bidding—the other agents send their proposal to the auction agent; (3) evaluation and
selection—the auction agent selects the optimal proposal; and (4) task execution—the auction agent
sends a notification to the selected agent. Though this solution is easy to implement, our solution is
better as the agents can join or leave the system during the negotiation (the CNP does not allow this
modification during the running of the algorithm; that is why the algorithm should be re-executed and
Information 2020, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                         3 of 21


 not allow2020,
Information this11,modification
                    271         during the running of the algorithm; that is why the algorithm should  be
                                                                                                  3 of 21
 re-executed and would never give results if the modification rate was high). The second advantage
 of our solution is reducing the number of involved agents.
would never give results if the modification rate was high). The second advantage of our solution is
       The threshold protocol [32] was inspired by the biological behavior model of insect colonies. An
reducing the number of involved agents.
 agent accepts the execution of a new task when it compares an environmental stimulus for the task
      The threshold protocol [32] was inspired by the biological behavior model of insect colonies.
 with some internal preference for the task type and finds it similar. In comparison with our solution,
An agent accepts the execution of a new task when it compares an environmental stimulus for the task
 this method suffers from a major inconvenience; it is impossible to deal with changes such as adding
with some internal preference for the task type and finds it similar. In comparison with our solution,
 a new task or removing an existing task while running the threshold protocol. Therefore, we cannot
this method suffers from a major inconvenience; it is impossible to deal with changes such as adding a
 profit from the previously obtained solution whenever the task set is changed.
new task or removing an existing task while running the threshold protocol. Therefore, we cannot
       The coalition formation and teamwork approach [33] is a complex solution consisting of task
profit from the previously obtained solution whenever the task set is changed.
 splitting, task allocation, coordination and communication. It is assumed that the agent’s
      The coalition formation and teamwork approach [33] is a complex solution consisting of task
 organization is known.
splitting, task allocation, coordination and communication. It is assumed that the agent’s organization
       Our solution is more flexible, as the coalition formation and teamwork approach is more
is known.
 restricted regarding the design and behavior of the members that constitute a group.
      Our solution is more flexible, as the coalition formation and teamwork approach is more restricted
regarding   the design
 3. Benchmark           and behavior
                  Production  System of the members that constitute a group.
3. Benchmark
      As much Production
                as possible,System
                              we will illustrate our contribution with a simple current example called
 RARM [34]. We describe it informally, but it will be used as an example of the various formalisms
     As much as possible, we will illustrate our contribution with a simple current example called
 presented in this article. The benchmark production system RARM, depicted in Figure 1, is
RARM [34]. We describe it informally, but it will be used as an example of the various formalisms
 constituted by two input conveyors and one output conveyor, a servicing robot and a processing–
presented in this article. The benchmark production system RARM, depicted in Figure 1, is constituted
 assembling unit. Workpieces to be treated as they come irregularly one by one. The workpieces of
by two input conveyors and one output conveyor, a servicing robot and a processing–assembling unit.
 Type A are carried via the conveyor C1, and the workpieces of Type B, via the conveyor C2. Only one
Workpieces to be treated as they come irregularly one by one. The workpieces of Type A are carried via
 workpiece can be on the input conveyor. A robot R transfers workpieces one after another to the
the conveyor C1, and the workpieces of Type B, via the conveyor C2. Only one workpiece can be on
 processing unit. The next workpiece can be put on the input conveyor when it has been emptied by
the input conveyor. A robot R transfers workpieces one after another to the processing unit. The next
 the robot.
workpiece can be put on the input conveyor when it has been emptied by the robot.




                               Figure 1. The benchmark production system RARM.
                                Figure 1. The benchmark production system RARM.
     Three production strategies can be defined (i) the first production policy consists of inserting a
Type Three    production
      A workpiece          strategies
                      (through          can be defined
                                   the conveyor          (i) the
                                                  C1) into    thefirst   production
                                                                   processing         policy
                                                                                 center  M toconsists of inserting
                                                                                               be treated,  then it isa
 Type A workpiece
evacuated              (through
            by the robot            the conveyor
                          to the output   conveyorC1)C3;into   thesecond
                                                         (ii) the   processing    center policy
                                                                            production    M to be  treated,
                                                                                                consists     then it is
                                                                                                         of inserting
 evacuated    by the  robot   to  the  output   conveyor    C3;   (ii)  the second   production   policy
a Type B workpiece (through the conveyor C2) into the processing center M to be treated, then it is       consists   of
 inserting  a Type  B  workpiece     (through  the conveyor      C2)   into the processing   center  M to
evacuated by the robot to the output conveyor C3; (iii) the third production policy consists of inserting  be treated,
athen
  TypeitAisworkpiece
           evacuatedintoby the
                            the robot   to thecenter
                                 processing    outputMconveyor       C3; (iii)
                                                        to be treated,    thenthe  thirdBproduction
                                                                                a Type    workpiece ispolicy
                                                                                                        addedconsists
                                                                                                                in the
center and the two workpieces are finally assembled. Afterward, the assembled product is taken by
Information 2020, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                    4 of 21

 Information
of  inserting2020, 11, 271A workpiece into the processing center M to be treated, then a Type B workpiece
                a Type                                                                              4 of 21

is added in the center and the two workpieces are finally assembled. Afterward, the assembled
product is taken by the robot and put above the C3 conveyer of output. The assembled product can
 the robot and put above the C3 conveyer of output. The assembled product can be transferred on C3
be transferred on C3 only when the output conveyor is empty and ready to receive the next one
 only when the output conveyor is empty and ready to receive the next one produced.
produced.
Running Example
Running Example

      RARM is
      RARM      is composed
                   composed of  of autonomous
                                   autonomous conveyors,
                                                  conveyors, robots,
                                                              robots, and
                                                                      and machines
                                                                           machines that we call
                                                                                             call agents.
                                                                                                   agents. RARM
                                                                                                             RARM
 is constructed    in a distributed  manner    since  each agent can perform detailed tasks by
is constructed in a distributed manner since each agent can perform detailed tasks by itself.   itself.  The  agents
                                                                                                                The
 differ in
agents     the types
         differ in theof  action
                        types      that they
                               of action  thatcan perform.
                                               they          Thus,Thus,
                                                     can perform.  agentsagents
                                                                          should  cooperate
                                                                                should       to fulfil
                                                                                       cooperate        tasks.tasks.
                                                                                                    to fulfil

4. The
4. TheAgent-Based
       Agent-BasedPlanning
                  Planning
       In general,
      In  general, agents
                     agents can
                             can be
                                 be classified
                                     classified based
                                                 based onon their
                                                            their decision
                                                                    decision making:
                                                                             making: (i) (i) reactive
                                                                                             reactive agents,
                                                                                                      agents, whose
                                                                                                               whose
 decisions  are  taken   according   to sensor   inputs;  and  (ii) planning  agents,    whose   decisions
decisions are taken according to sensor inputs; and (ii) planning agents, whose decisions are more          are  more
 intelligent as they   consider  many   constraints    such as sensing   inputs,  goal,  intention  and/or
intelligent as they consider many constraints such as sensing inputs, goal, intention and/or utility.       utility.
       We propose
      We   propose thethe conceptual
                           conceptual planning
                                        planning model
                                                    model ofof an
                                                               an agent,
                                                                    agent, which
                                                                           which is is composed
                                                                                       composed of  of the
                                                                                                       the following
                                                                                                           following
 components:     (i) the  sensing  input,  (ii) the decision  making     and (iii) the  actuator   output
components: (i) the sensing input, (ii) the decision making and (iii) the actuator output (Figure 2).      (Figure   2).
 Thus,  each planning     agent is autonomous      in sensing,  acting  and making
Thus, each planning agent is autonomous in sensing, acting and making a decision.      a decision.




                                        Figure
                                        Figure 2.
                                               2. The
                                                  Theconceptual
                                                      conceptualplanning
                                                                planningmodel.
                                                                         model.

       Given aa description
       Given      description of   of the
                                        the environment
                                              environmentin     inwhich
                                                                   whichthe theplanning
                                                                                planningagent
                                                                                           agentexists,
                                                                                                   exists,the
                                                                                                            thegoal
                                                                                                                goaltotoachieve,
                                                                                                                         achieve,
 the set
the   set ofofoperations
               operations    to to
                                be performed,
                                    be performed,    and the
                                                           andcurrent    state ofstate
                                                                  the current     the agent,
                                                                                        of thetheagent,
                                                                                                  planningthe agent   determines
                                                                                                               planning    agent
 a plan, which
determines          is an arrangement
                 a plan,    which is an of         actions to beofperformed
                                                arrangement            actions totobeattain the goal.
                                                                                       performed     to The   planning
                                                                                                         attain          agent
                                                                                                                 the goal.    Theis
 needed    either  to   reach  a goal   that   satisfies  some   conditions   or to perform   several
planning agent is needed either to reach a goal that satisfies some conditions or to perform several   tasks  in a specific order.
tasks The
        in a most
              specificimportant
                          order. step in the planning model is decision making. We propose the decision
 makingThe as  a state
             most          machine
                     important         thatinincludes
                                    step                   a description
                                                the planning      model isofdecision
                                                                               differentmaking.
                                                                                          states, the
                                                                                                   Weinitial
                                                                                                        proposestate(s), and the
                                                                                                                   the decision
 transitions   from     one  state  to  another     state  according    to some  conditions   defined
making as a state machine that includes a description of different states, the initial state(s), and thein  advance.   Therefore,
 a classical planning
transitions     from one    problem
                               state to  is represented
                                             another state   as aaccording
                                                                  state-transition   model.
                                                                               to some       The planning
                                                                                          conditions    definedagentinstarts from
                                                                                                                       advance.
 the  current    state,   which    constitutes      the  relevant     part of the  world,  and   tries
Therefore, a classical planning problem is represented as a state-transition model. The planning agent to  reach  another    state,
 whichfrom
starts    represents     the goal
                the current          statewhich
                                 state,      (see Algorithm
                                                     constitutes  1).the relevant part of the world, and tries to reach
anotherTo define     the internal
           state, which               behavior
                             represents            of the
                                             the goal       agent,
                                                        state   (seewe   use the following
                                                                      Algorithm    1).        algorithm where:
       To define the internal behavior of the agent, we use the following algorithm where:
 •     The queue, Q, is used to save every arriving event;
•• The The queue,
             event, ev, Q, represents
                           is used to save       every input;
                                           any event     arriving event;
•• The       event,    ev, represents      any   event   input;
       The state, Si,j, is an element of the state machine.
•      The state, Si,j, is an element of the state machine.
Information 2020, 11, 271                                                                                          5 of 21



 Algorithm 1 GenericBehavior.
 begin
 while (Q.length() > 0) do
        ev←Q.Head()
        Si,j ←currentStatei
        If ev ∈ I(Si,j ) then
              For each state Si,k ∈ next(Si,j )  do
                1. Find the plan list that can satisfy Si,k
                2. Assess every possible plan’s pre-conditions and retain only those whose pre-conditions are satisfied.
                3. For every remaining plan, estimate its required resources.
                4. Sort by its priority
                    If execute(Si,k ) then
                             currentStatei ←Si,k
                             break
                    end if
              end for
        end if
 end while
 end.

Running Example

    If we consider RARM, we define the following parts:
    (i) The sensing input: the planning agent knows its environment through sensors. Thus, the data
provided by the sensors present the agent’s vision of its environment. It is defined as follows:

3     The sensor sens1 (respectively sens2) is used to verify if there is a workpiece at the position p1
      (respectively the position p2) on the conveyor C1;
3     The sensor sens3 (respectively sens4) checks for the existence of a workpiece at the position p3
      (respectively the position p4) on the conveyor C2;
3     The sensor sens5 (respectively sens6) verifies if there is a workpiece at the position p5 (respectively
      the position p6) on the conveyor C3;
3     The sensor sens7 observes if there is a Type A workpiece at the unit M;
3     The sensor sens8 enables the checking of if there is a Type B workpiece at the unit M;
3     The sensor sens9 (respectively sens10) perceives if the conveyor C1 is in its extreme left (respectively
      right) position;
3     The sensor sens11 (respectively sens12) determines if the conveyor C2 is in its extreme left
      (respectively right) position;
3     The sensor sens13 (respectively sens14) detects if the conveyor C3 is in its extreme left (respectively
      right) position;
3     The sensor sens15 (respectively sens16) is used to decide if the robotic agent arm is in its lower
      (respectively higher) position.

      (ii) The actuator output: the planning agent can control the environment using the following actuators:

3     The actuator act1 ensures the movement of the conveyor C1;
3     The actuator act2 moves the conveyor C2;
3     The actuator act3 enables the movement of the conveyor C3;
3     The actuator act4 rotates a robotic agent;
3     The actuator act5 elevates the robotic agent arm vertically;
3     The actuator act6 picks up and drops a piece with the robotic agent arm;
3     The actuator act7 treats the workpiece;
Information 2020, 11, 271                                                                                  6 of 21



3     The actuator act8 assemblies two pieces.

     (iii) The decision making: the planning agent decides the actions to perform to achieve the goal.
The set of actions is {Conveyor1_left, Rotate1_left, Rotate1_right, Conveyor2_left, Rotate2_left, Rotate2_right,
Conveyor3_left, Rotate3_left, Rotate3_right, take1, take2, take3, load1, load2, load3, put1, put2, put3, process1,
process2}. These are as follows:

3     Conveyor1_left (respectively Conveyor2_left, Conveyor3_left) means a workpiece of type A
      (respectively B, AB) is moving to the left of conveyor C1 (respectively C2, C3) from position p1
      (respectively p3, p5) to position p2 (respectively p4, p6);
3     Rotate1_left (respectively Rotate2_left, Rotate3_left) means the robotic agent taking a workpiece
      of type A (respectively B, AB) is moving to the left from the position p2 (respectively p4, p6)
      of conveyor C1 (respectively C2, C3) to the processing unit M (respectively the position p2 of
      conveyor C1);
3     Rotate1_right (respectively Rotate2_right, Rotate3_right) means the robotic agent taking a workpiece
      of type A (respectively B, AB) is moving to the right from the processing unit M to the position p2
      (respectively p4, p6) of conveyor C1 (respectively C2, C3);
3     take1 (respectively take2, take3) means the operation of taking a workpiece of type A (respectively
      B, AB);
3     load1 (respectively load2, load3) means loading a workpiece of type A (respectively B, AB);
3     put1 (respectively put2, put3) means the operation of putting a workpiece of type A (respectively B, AB);
3     process1 (respectively process2) means processing a workpiece of type A (respectively B).

5. Distributed Task Allocation
    Distributed task allocation is necessary when a task cannot be executed by only one planning
agent. Planning agents situated in the multi-agent system should cooperate to achieve this task.
    The formal definition of distribution task allocation in a multi-planning agent is as follows:

-     a set of planning agent A = {A1 , . . . , An };
-     each planning agent Ai has a set of resources Ri = {Ri1 , . . . , Rim };
-     a set of tasks to be executed in the multi-planning agent T = {T1 , . . . , Tp };
-     each task Tk may require a set of resources {Rk1 , . . . , Rkl }.

     A distributed task allocation is accomplished if, and only if, every task Tk is executed on an agent
Ai having all the required resources for this task.

5.1. The Principle of Distributed Task Allocation
      To ensure distributed task allocation, we define two kinds of planning agent:

3     Initiator: the planning agent that requests help to perform its task;
3     Participant: the planning agent having the requested resources that receives the announced task
      and sends back its response.

     To ensure the coherent behavior of the planning agent, we propose two possible states, i.e.,
States = {BUSY, IDLE}. Whenever a planning agent is an initiator, the planning agent state should
be BUSY. We consider a planning agent in an IDLE state when it is free, i.e., when it has no task to
do. We suppose that only an IDLE planning agent can be assigned to a new task as an initiator or as
a participant.
     The idea of the algorithm is illustrated as follows.

3     The initiator agent, denoted as InitA: the planning agent that starts the distributed task allocation
      process. There are many reasons to apply a distributed task allocation in the whole system such
Information 2020, 11, 271                                                                                 7 of 21



      as the fact that the planning agent is unable to execute a task by itself, it is too busy, or it does
      not have all the necessary resources. Each initiator agent InitA has a list of planning agents.
      It sends a request to the planning agents: Resource_Announce_Message = ≺AgentID, TaskID,
      Resource(number), containing the initiator agent identity, the task identity and the number of
      requested resources.

      The initiator agent waits for the response from the other planning agents.

3     The planning agent (called the participant agent) receives the message Resource_Announce_Message
      sent by the initiator agent InitA; it checks the possibility of applying distributed task allocation
      based on its state. If it is feasible (i.e., the participant agent has the requested resources and is
      idle), it accepts the collaboration with the initiator agent. If the participant agent is busy, it refuses
      the request.

       â If the participant agent Aj is IDLE then it provides data regarding its identity, the types of
         resources it owns and the executing time, explicitly, Propose_Message = ≺AgentID, Resource,
         Execute.
       â If the participant agent Aj is BUSY then it sends a negative response containing the following
         message Refuse_Message = ≺AgentID.
3     After collecting the responses from all the participant agents or the timeout is over, the initiator
      agent InitA then compares the available resources from these participant agents with the resources
      required for its task tInitA. This leads to two cases:

     If the initiator agent InitA obtains all the requested resources then the initiator agent sends
a notification message to the selected participant agent Aj. The initiator planning agent waits for
a confirmation.

3     Two cases can happen depending on the selected participant agent Aj state

       â If the selected participant agent Aj is still free, it sends a confirmation message to the
         initiator agent InitA and its state will be changed to BUSY: Confirm_Message = ≺AgentID.
         Consequently, the distributed task allocation protocol finishes well.
       â If the selected participant agent Aj becomes busy (which means it receives a notification
         message from another initiator), it sends a decline message to the initiator agent InitA:
         Decline_Message = ≺AgentID. Therefore, the initiator agent InitA repeats the same steps
         from the beginning.

   The different distributed task allocation steps are illustrated in Figure 3, where nbR represents the
number of participant agents related to the initiator agent InitA.
Information 2020, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                               8 of 21



         Information 2020, 11, 271                                                                                              8 of 21




                                     Figure Figure
                                            3. Distributed  task allocation
                                                    3. Distributed           approach.
                                                                    task allocation approach.

       5.2. Dynamic
5.2. Dynamic        Planning
              Planning       Agent Discovery
                       Agent Discovery        with JADE
                                       with JADE
             We implement
     We implement                 the different
                          the different    planningplanning
                                                        agentsagents
                                                                 with thewithJADE
                                                                                the JADE
                                                                                       (JavaTM(JavaTM
                                                                                                   Agent Agent      DEvelopment)
                                                                                                            DEvelopment)
       framework.      JADE    is  a platform   to  develop   MAS    in  compliance       with
framework. JADE is a platform to develop MAS in compliance with the Foundation for Intelligent  the  Foundation      for Intelligent
       Physical   Agents    (FIPA)
Physical Agents (FIPA) specifications.specifications.
     With theWith  the platform
                platform     JADE,JADE,
                                      we findwethefind  the directory
                                                     directory          facilitator
                                                                facilitator           (DF) providing
                                                                             (DF) providing       a Yellowa Yellow
                                                                                                              Pages Pages
                                                                                                                      serviceservice
       where   the initiator  agent    can find  other  planning   agents   providing
where the initiator agent can find other planning agents providing the resources it needs the resources    it needs   to  accomplish
                                                                                                                             to
       its tasks. The   jade.domain.DFService         class provides   static utility  methods     that
accomplish its tasks. The jade.domain.DFService class provides static utility methods that facilitate   facilitate the   interactions
       with the DF:
the interactions   withregister(),
                          the DF: modify(),
                                     register(),deregister(),  and search()and
                                                 modify(), deregister(),       [35].search()
                                                                                      The first  stepThe
                                                                                              [35].   is that
                                                                                                           firsthe
                                                                                                                stepplanning
                                                                                                                       is that agent
       publishes   its  provided     resources.   The   second   step is that  the   initiator agent
the planning agent publishes its provided resources. The second step is that the initiator agent        searches   in  the  directory
       facilitator
searches           to discover
           in the directory        the planning
                              facilitator           agents
                                           to discover      providing
                                                          the planningthe     required
                                                                          agents          resources.
                                                                                   providing     the required resources.

       5.2.1. Publish
5.2.1 Publish          a Provided
               a Provided         Resource
                            Resource
             The planning
      The planning          agent
                     agent can    can publish
                                publish        a provided
                                        a provided         resource
                                                    resource          by creating
                                                               by creating        a proper
                                                                            a proper       description,
                                                                                     description, which which
                                                                                                        is     is
       an instance
an instance   of the of the DFAgentDescription
                     DFAgentDescription           class,
                                           class, and    and
                                                      call thecall the register()
                                                                register() method method
                                                                                   of the of the DFService
                                                                                          DFService class. class.
       The  planning  agent  must provide  a description
The planning agent must provide a description of:         of:

           TheAID
      â agent
     The        agent  AID (unique
                     (unique         identifier);
                              identifier);
    Aâ     A collection
       collection        of resource
                  of resource         descriptions
                               descriptions        (class ServiceDescription):
                                            (class ServiceDescription):
     •       The
               • resource  type (e.g.,
                    The resource  type“Resource1”);
                                        (e.g., “Resource1”);
     •       The
               • resource  name  (e.g., “Resource”);
                    The resource name (e.g., “Resource”);
     •       The
               • languages,   ontologies
                    The languages,         and and
                                    ontologies   interaction protocols
                                                     interaction        that
                                                                 protocols   must
                                                                           that mustbebeknown
                                                                                         known to exploitthe
                                                                                               to exploit theservice.
             service.
Information 2020, 11, 271                                                                        9 of 21



Running Example
/// Register the Planning Agent in DFService
     DFAgentDescription reg = new DFAgentDescription();
     reg.setName(getAID());
     ServiceDescription desc = new ServiceDescription();
     desc.setType(“Resource1”);
     desc.setName(“Resource”);
     reg.addServices(desc);
     try {
           DFService.register(this, reg);
     }
     catch (FIPAException fe) {
           fe.printStackTrace();
     }

5.2.2. Search a Required Resource
     The initiator agent can search for some required resources by providing the directory facilitator
with a template description. The result of the research is a list of all the descriptions matching the
template. The search() method of the DFService class provides the result. The final result will be the
set of planning agents providing the requested resource.

Running Example

DFAgentDescription template = new DFAgentDescription();
      ServiceDescription desc = new ServiceDescription();
        desc.setType(“Resource1”);
        template.addServices(desc);
          DFAgentDescription[[] result;
        try {
          do
          {
                  result = DFService.search(myAgent, template);
                  planningAgents = new AID[result.length];
                       for (int i = 0; i < result.length; i++)
                               planningAgents[i] = result[i].getName();
                  }
             while (result.length <= 0);
           }
          catch (FIPAException fe) {
             fe.printStackTrace();
          }
nbR = planningAgents.length;

5.3. Message Exchanged between Initiator and Planning Agents with JADE
      A multi-agent system interacts through exchanging asynchronous messages. All participant agents
communicate using messages that correspond to the FIPA ACL specification. This format comprises
a number of fields and in particular (1) the communicative intention (also called “performative”),
indicating what the sender intends to achieve by sending the message (for instance the performative can
be REQUEST, INFORM, QUERY_IF, CFP, PROPOSE, ACCEPT_PROPOSAL, REJECT_PROPOSAL, etc.);
(2) the content, i.e., the actual information included in the message, which may be a string in simple
Information 2020, 11, 271                                                                         10 of 21



cases—otherwise, we need a content language, a corresponding ontology and a protocol; and (3) the
list of receivers.

5.3.1. Creating a Message According to FIPA ACL Specification
     Sending a message to another participant agent is as simple as filling the fields of an ACLMessage
object and then calling the send() method of the agent class.

Running Example

// The code below creates a new message with the following content:
ACLMessage msg = new ACLMessage(ACLMessage.INFORM); // (1) the performative: INFORM,
msg.addReceiver(new AID(“Agent1”, AID.ISLOCALNAME)); // (3) the receiver: Agent1
msg.setContent(“I need the help from others”); // (2) the content: requesting help from other agents
send(msg); // sending the message

5.3.2. Receiving a Message with a Matching Method
     When a template is specified, the receive() method returns the first message (if any) matching
it, while ignoring all non-matching messages. Such templates are implemented as instances of the
jade.lang.acl.MessageTemplate class, which provides a number of factory methods to create templates
in a very simple and flexible way.

Running Example

The action() method is modified so that the call to myAgent.receive() ignores all messages except those
whose performative is PROPOSE:
    public void action() {
MessageTemplate mt = MessageTemplate.MatchPerformative(ACLMessage. PROPOSE);
ACLMessage msg = myAgent.receive(mt);
if (msg != null) {
// REQUEST Message received. Process it
...
}
else {
block();
}
}

5.4. Agent Behavior in JADE
     A behavior represents a task that a participant agent can carry out. A behavior is a kind of control
thread for the agent where the method action() is similar to Thread.run(). New behaviors can be added
at any time during the agent’s life (Figure 4).

•     Behaviour class:        it is implemented as an object of a class that extends
      jade.core.behaviours.Behaviour. The Behaviour class is an abstract class having several abstract
      methods. The action method defines the operation to be performed when the behavior is in
      execution. The done method returns a boolean value to indicate whether or not a behavior has
      completed. The Behaviour class also provides two methods, named onStart and onEnd. These
      methods can be overridden by user defined subclasses when some actions are to be executed
      before and after running behavior execution.
•     SimpleBehaviour class: it is an abstract class representing simple atomic behaviors (which means
      it is composed of only one behavior). It can be overridden by user defined subclasses which are
      OneShotBehaviour and CyclicBehaviour classes.
Information 2020, 11, 271                                                                                           11 of 21



•     OneShotBehaviour class: it represents atomic behaviors that must be executed only once and
      cannot be blocked. Two subclasses inherit from the OneShotBehaviour class, which are the
      WakerBehaviour and the TickerBehaviour classes.

      3     The WakerBehaviour class implements a one-shot task that must be executed only once just
            after a given timeout has elapsed, which is specified in the handleElapsedTimeout method.
      3     The ReceiverBehaviour class, which triggers when a given type of message is received or a
            timeout      expires.
             Information 2020, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                    11 of 21

•     CyclicBehaviour   class: it models
               The WakerBehaviour          atomic
                                         class       behaviors
                                               implements        thattask
                                                           a one-shot  must thatbemust
                                                                                    executed  forever.
                                                                                       be executed      once its done
                                                                                                   only Thus,
                  just after a given timeout  has elapsed, which  is specified  in the handleElapsedTimeout
      method always returns false. The CyclicBehaviour class represents “Cyclic” behaviors that never
      complete andmethod.
                    whose action method executes the same operations each time it is called.
                      The ReceiverBehaviour class, which triggers when a given type of message is received or
                       a timeout expires.
      3    The TickerBehaviour class implements a cyclic task that must be executed recurrently.
            • periodic
           The CyclicBehaviour
                        actionsclass:
                                  areitdetermined
                                        models atomicin
                                                      behaviors that must
                                                        the onTick        be executed forever. Thus, its done
                                                                      method.
                  method always returns false. The CyclicBehaviour class represents “Cyclic” behaviors that never
•     CompositeBehaviour
               complete and whose    actionThis
                                 class:          abstract
                                            method   executesclass
                                                               the samemodels    behaviors
                                                                         operations each time ithat   are made up of a
                                                                                                is called.
      number of The TickerBehaviour class implements a cyclic task that must be executed recurrently. by
                   other  behaviors     (children).      Thus,    the  actual   operations    performed       The executing
      this behaviorperiodic
                      are notactions
                               defined    in the behavior
                                     are determined             itselfmethod.
                                                      in the onTick    but inside its children, while the composite
      behavior
            •   only takes care ofclass:
               CompositeBehaviour       child  scheduling
                                            This abstract classaccording      to a given
                                                                 models behaviors  that are policy
                                                                                            made up(sequentially
                                                                                                      of a number    for the
               of other behaviors
      SequentialBehaviour         (children).
                               class,         Thus, the actual
                                        concurrently            operations
                                                           for the          performed by executing
                                                                      ParallelBehaviour              this behavior
                                                                                             class and     as a finite state
               are not
      machine for   thedefined in the behavior
                        FSMBehaviour           itself but inside its children, while the composite behavior only
                                            class).
                takes care of child scheduling according to a given policy (sequentially for the
                SequentialBehaviour class, concurrently for the ParallelBehaviour class and as a finite state
      3     ParallelBehaviour class: this behavior controls a set of sub-behaviors that execute in parallel.
                machine for the FSMBehaviour class).
        The most important thing is the termination condition; it is possible to specify the termination
              ParallelBehaviour class: this behavior controls a set of sub-behaviors that execute in
        of ParallelBehaviour     when all of its sub-behaviors terminate or any sub-behavior is ended.
                 parallel. The most important thing is the termination condition; it is possible to specify the
      3 SequentialBehaviour        class: this behavior
                 termination of ParallelBehaviour   when allis composed     of a set terminate
                                                                of its sub-behaviors   of sub-behaviors
                                                                                                  or any sub- where each
                 behaviorafter
        one is executed    is ended.
                                the other. The SequentialBehaviour terminates when all its sub-behaviors
        haveterminated.
                 SequentialBehaviour class: this behavior is composed of a set of sub-behaviors where each
                       one is executed after the other. The SequentialBehaviour terminates when all its sub-
•     ReceiverBehaviour
                   behaviorsclass: a behavior with a timeout that waits until the reception of a message or
                             have terminated.
      the elapsing
            •      of a given  timeout.
               ReceiverBehaviour class: a behavior with a timeout that waits until the reception of a message
                  or the elapsing of a given timeout.




                                           Figure 4. Behavior class hierarchy in JADE.
                                       Figure 4. Behavior class hierarchy in JADE.
Information 2020, 11, 271                                                                        12 of 21



Running Example

     We can design the dynamic initiator agent behavior with JADE. To make the initiator agent execute
a task implemented by a behavior object, the behavior should be added to the agent by means of the
addBehavior() method of the agent class in the setup() method or inside another behavior. First of all,
the initiator agent broadcasts a message with the performative Query_REF to all the participant agents.
The behaviors include:

3     A ParallelBehaviour, which is composed of a sub-behavior set. Each sub-behavior is a
      ReceiverBehaviour class, which means it waits until the reception of a message, an answer
      from a particular participant agent or a given timeout is elapsed. The termination of this
      ParallelBehaviour is ensured when all of its sub-behaviors (i.e., ReceiverBehaviour) terminate.
      The ReceiverBehaviour have 0.5 s as a timeout period.
3     After that, there is a delay (1 s) before sending a REQUEST to the best answer from a specific
      participant agent.
3     The final behavior is a receiver behavior, which waits for an AGREE/REFUSE message from this
      specific participant agent with a common conversation ID.

     In the case of failure, our initiator agent launches another round of negotiation by simply calling
setup again.

      public class Initiator extends Agent
      {
         private Initiator myAgent;
         private int requested;
         private int resourceType;
         int      bestExecute;
        ACLMessage message, bestProposal;
         static protected Random genAleatoire = new Random();

      protected void setup()
           {
      Object[[] args = getArguments();
      if (args != null && args.length > 0) {
           resourceType=((Integer)args[0]).intValue();
           }
      bestExecute = 1000;
      bestProposal = null;
      // number of resources requested: generated rondom
           requested=(int) Math.floor(genAleatoire.nextDouble() *10;
         myAgent=this;
                 // Register the resource offered by the Initiator agent in DFService
           DFAgentDescription dfd = new DFAgentDescription();
           dfd.setName(getAID());
           ServiceDescription sd = new ServiceDescription();
           sd.setType(String.valueOf(resourceType));
           sd.setName("Resource");
           dfd.addServices(sd);
           try {
              DFService.register(this, dfd);
           }
           catch (FIPAException fe) {
Information 2020, 11, 271                                                                        13 of 21



               fe.printStackTrace();
           }

      // Add a TickerBehaviour that searches Planning agents every 2 seconds in the DF
      addBehaviour(new TickerBehaviour(this, 2000)
      {
      protected void onTick() {
          // Update the list of Planning agents
          DFAgentDescription template = new DFAgentDescription();
              ServiceDescription desc = new ServiceDescription();
                desc.setType(resourceType);
                template.addServices(desc);
                  DFAgentDescription[[] result;
                try {
                  do
                  {
                       result = DFService.search(myAgent, template);
                       planningAgents = new AID[result.length];
                       for (int i = 0; i < result.length; i++)
                                            planningAgents[i] = result[i].getName();
                            }
                      while (result.length <= 0);
                    }
                 catch (FIPAException fe) {
                      fe.printStackTrace();
                 }
          nbR= planningAgents.length;
          }
      };
                 message = newMsg( ACLMessage.REQUEST );

                   MessageTemplate template = MessageTemplate.and(
                     MessageTemplate.MatchPerformative( ACLMessage.PROPOSE ),
                     MessageTemplate.MatchConversationId(message.getConversationId() ));
                   SequentialBehaviour seq = new SequentialBehaviour();
                   addBehaviour( seq );

                   ParallelBehaviour par = new ParallelBehaviour( ParallelBehaviour.WHEN_ALL );
                   seq.addSubBehaviour( par );

                   for (int i = 0; i < planningAgents.length; i++)
                   {
                        message.addReceiver( new AID(planningAgents[i], AID.ISLOCALNAME ));
                        par.addSubBehaviour( new ReceiverBehaviour( this, 500, template)
                              {
                                   public void handle( ACLMessage message)
                                   {
                                        if (message != null) {
                                             int execute = Integer.parseInt( message.getContent());
                                             if (execute < bestExecute) {
Information 2020, 11, 271                                                                          14 of 21



                                                   bestExecute = execute;
                                                   bestProposal = message;
                                           }
                                       }
                                  }
                            });
                   }

                   seq.addSubBehaviour(new DelayBehaviour(this, 1000)
                    {
                       public void handleElapsedTimeout()
                       {
                                 if (bestProposal != null) {
                                       //The best proposal is obtained through bestProposal.getSender()
                                       ACLMessage reply = bestProposal.createReply();
                                       reply.setPerformative( ACLMessage.ACCEPT );
                                       send ( reply );
                                 }
                        }
                   });

                seq.addSubBehaviour( new ReceiverBehaviour( this, 500,
                           MessageTemplate.and(
                           MessageTemplate.MatchConversationId(message.getConversationId()),
                               MessageTemplate.or(
                                   MessageTemplate.MatchPerformative( ACLMessage.CONFIRM ),
                                   MessageTemplate.MatchPerformative( ACLMessage.REFUSE ))) )
                           {
                               public void handle( ACLMessage message)
                               {
                                   if (message != null ) {
                                         if( message.getPerformative() == ACLMessage. CONFIRM)
                                         System.out.println("Distributed Task Allocation is Finished”);
                                         else
                                         // repeat the same steps in case of failure
                                         setup();
                                    }
                                    else {
                                         //The time is elapsed without response so repeat the same steps
                                         setup();
                                    }
                               }
                           });

                   send ( message );
            }
Information 2020, 11, 271                                                                                      15 of 21



5.5. The Model Checking of Distributed Task Allocation
      The model checking of distributed task allocation consists of two steps. The first step is to represent
the distributed task allocation with the Petri net, which permits the representation of a concurrent
process. The second step is the verification of some properties using computation tree logic (CTL)
with the model checker its-ctl [36].
      As explained in the previous section, we distinguish two kinds of participating agents, which
are the initiator and the participant agent (Figure 5). For further explanation of the Petri net diagram
(especially   the11,
Information 2020, transition  meanings),
                     x FOR PEER REVIEW refer to Table 1.                                               15 of 21




                               Figure 5. Formal
                                         Formal distributed task allocation with Petri net.

                            Table 1. The meaning of the main transitions related to Figure 5.

Transition                                                   Meaning
    t0         The initiator agent needs to apply a distributed task allocation
    t1         The initiator agent sends a request to a participant agenti
    t3         The initiator agent receives a positive answer from the participant agenti
    t4         The initiator agent receives a negative answer from the participant agenti
               The initiator agent accepts the proposition from the participant agenti to apply the new
      t5
               distributed task allocation
               The initiator agent refuses the proposition from the participant agenti to apply the new
      t7
               distributed task allocation
      t9       A participant agentj receives the request from the initiator agent for distributed task allocation
     t10       The participant agentj receives a disapproval message from the initiator agent
     t11       The participant agentj sends a proposition to the initiator agent
     t12       The participant agentj receives an approval message from the initiator agent
Information 2020, 11, 271                                                                                          16 of 21



                            Table 1. The meaning of the main transitions related to Figure 5.

    Transition                                                   Meaning
         t0          The initiator agent needs to apply a distributed task allocation
         t1          The initiator agent sends a request to a participant agenti
         t3          The initiator agent receives a positive answer from the participant agenti
         t4          The initiator agent receives a negative answer from the participant agenti
                     The initiator agent accepts the proposition from the participant agenti to apply the new
         t5
                     distributed task allocation
                     The initiator agent refuses the proposition from the participant agenti to apply the new
         t7
                     distributed task allocation
         t9          A participant agentj receives the request from the initiator agent for distributed task allocation
         t10         The participant agentj receives a disapproval message from the initiator agent
         t11         The participant agentj sends a proposition to the initiator agent
         t12         The participant agentj receives an approval message from the initiator agent
         t13         The participant agentj send a confirmation to the initiator agent
         t16         The participant agentj refuses to help the initiator agent


     CTL properties: To verify that our Petri net model is correct, we present some properties expressed
with the CTL formalism. These properties are checked by the ITS-CTL model checker [36]

•     Property 1: Whenever an initiator agent needs to ensure a task but does not have all the necessary
      resources, the initiator agent informs the participant agentj .
      AG (P1 = > EF P9).

•     Property 2: During the negotiation, the initiator agent receives a positive response from the
      participant agentj or receives a disapproval message.
      EF P1 AND EF (P11 OR P15).

•     Property 3: The participant agenti could not receive two different decisions from the initiator agent
      at the same time (i.e., either the initiator agent accepts or refuses the new distributed allocation).
      NOT EF (P5 AND P6).

     All these properties are proven to be true with the ITS-CTL model checker.
     eCTL properties: The following eCTL property is proven to be true:
     Property 4: Whenever the participant agentj accepts the new distributed task allocation, it awaits
the final decision from the initiator agent, which can be a confirmation to apply a new distributed
allocation or to cancel the new distributed allocation.
     AGA t11 XAGA (t5 OR t7) X p14.

6. Evaluation
      To evaluate our proposed solution for distributed task allocation in a multi-agent system, we test
its efficiency compared with a second approach [37] and the greedy distributed allocation protocol
(GDAP) [38]. We choose these two approaches because they are closed and similar to our work.
      With the second approach [37], we find three kinds of agents: the manager (the same as the
initiator agent in this paper); the participant (the same as the planning agent in this paper), which
offers to perform the announced task; and the mediator, which helps the manager to find resources by
requesting its own neighbors. This approach is good but gives the priority to direct linked neighboring
agents (for the manager), which could affect the solution. The main difference between the second
Information 2020, 11, 271                                                                            17 of 21



approach [37] and our solution is as follows: in the second approach [37], the neighbors can be related
to the manager as well as the mediator, but in our solution, the neighbors are only related to the
initiator agent having the requested resources that can be involved in the solution.
      The greedy distributed allocation protocol (GDAP) [38] can be described briefly as follows:
there are many manager agents (each manager is responsible for a task) and many contractor agents
(each contractor controls a resource). All manager agents (the same as the initiator agent in this paper)
try to find contractor agents (the same as the participants in this paper) who can help them with
their tasks. Contractor agents offer help to the manager agent by sending a bid (consisting of all the
available resources to be allocated to the task). In the end, there is a possibility that the manager agent
collects all the required resources and so informs the corresponding contractors. The GDAP can lead
to many unallocated tasks due to static neighbors. In our approach, we try to resolve this problem by
dynamically discovering the neighboring agents providing the requested resources.
      We implemented the three approaches for the distributed task allocation algorithm in the JADE
Framework, and we tested them. The performance of our solution is evaluated through a different
number of neighboring agents. The only changing variable in this setting is the average number of
neighbors. This setting, as shown in Table 2, intends to represent the influence of neighbors’ numbers
on the performance of three approaches.

                                     Table 2. The details of the settings.

                                           Setting                    Quantity
                                    Number of agents                      10
                               Average number of neighbors              [1..10]
                                         Tasks                             5
                                   Available resources                     6


       The algorithms have been evaluated according to three criteria in this experiment:
the communication cost, the execution time and the utility ratio.
       Firstly, we compare the three approaches by counting the maximum number of exchanged
messages between agents after each distributed task allocation scenario. For our approach, we denote
by numberMsg messages such the number when we use only two kinds of agents, which are initiator
and participant agents. For the second approach [7], we denote by numberMsgMd messages such the
number when we use manager, mediator and participant agents in coordination.
       If we apply our approach, in this case, the initiator agent has to inform all the planning agents
(i.e., N) to apply any distributed task before waiting for their responses and, after that, decide to accept
or to refuse the offer; then, numberMsg = 2 * N.
       If we apply the second approach [37], in this case, the manager agent has to inform all its
neighboring agents (i.e., N) to apply any distributed task. The worst case is needing the help of another
agent (mediator), which also in turn needs another mediator, and so forth. If we consider that each
mediator agent sends the request to its neighboring agents, P represents the number of mediator agents
existing in the distributed system (where P << N). Then, numberMsgMd = (2 * N) * P.
       If we apply the GDAP, the manager agent has to request only its neighbors (in the best case).
In the worst case, there is a failure in task allocation and the same process has to be repeated several
times by another managers. The worst case is to have the number of manager agents existing in the
distributed system being equal to all the agents. Then, numberMsgMd = (2 * N) * N.
       The algorithms have been evaluated according to the number of exchanged messages as a criterion in
this experiment. All the results are obtained by applying the logarithm function.
       From Figure 6, it is clear that whenever the number of neighboring agents is reduced, the three
approaches have approximatively the same performance. Whenever the number of neighboring
agents is elevated, it is evident that our approach is the best as it reduces the communication cost.
In conclusion, our proposed solution is very efficient (especially when the neighboring agent number
        The algorithms have been evaluated according to the number of exchanged messages as a criterion
  in this experiment. All the results are obtained by applying the logarithm function.
        From Figure 6, it is clear that whenever the number of neighboring agents is reduced, the three
  approaches have approximatively the same performance. Whenever the number of neighboring
  agents is elevated, it is evident that our approach is the best as it reduces the communication
Information 2020, 11, 271
                                                                                                                       cost.
                                                                                                                   18 of 21
  In conclusion, our proposed solution is very efficient (especially when the neighboring agent number
  is high) as it requests little message exchange. The approach in [37] suffers from a very high message
isexchange
    high) as it requests
              rate  in the little
                           case ofmessage    exchange.agent
                                     the neighboring       The approach     in [37]important.
                                                                  number being       suffers from a very high message
exchange     rate  in the case  of  the  neighboring    agent  number     being   important.
        The second criterion is the execution time. The unit of execution time is the millisecond. For
       The second
  simplicity,          criterion
               we suppose      thatis once
                                       the execution     time.allocated
                                            a task has been       The unit to of
                                                                               an execution    time is
                                                                                   agent, the agent     the millisecond.
                                                                                                      would   successfully
For   simplicity,
  finish  this taskwewithout
                        supposefailure.
                                  that onceWe a task
                                                 wouldhaslike
                                                          beentoallocated
                                                                   test, in to anexperiment,
                                                                            this   agent, the agent
                                                                                                 the would
                                                                                                     impactsuccessfully
                                                                                                               of different
finish
  average numbers of neighbors on the execution time applied for these three approaches. average
        this task  without   failure.   We would    like to test, in this experiment,   the impact   of different
numbers of neighbors on the execution time applied for these three approaches.

                                                        6

                                                                    Our Approach
                                                        5           GDAP
                                                                    Approach [37]
                                   Number of messages


                                                        4


                                                        3


                                                        2


                                                        1


                                                        0
                                                            1   2      3    4       5   6   7   8   9   10

                                                                      Average number of neighbors


               Figure 6. Comparison between the three approaches based on exchanged messages.

     We notice in Figure 7 that our approach tracks the lowest execution time amongst the other ones.
     The third criterion is the utility ratio, which is defined as the sum of completed tasks divided by
the total number of tasks.
                                                P
                                                  success f ul − completed − task
                              Utility Ratio =
                                                      Total − o f − Tasks

      We would like to test, in this experiment, the influence of different average numbers of neighbors
on the three algorithms. We notice in Figure 8 that the utility ratio of our algorithm in different
networks is more reliable than that of the GDAP algorithm. We notice also that the GDAP solution
utility is the worst in the majority of cases.
      Whenever the number of neighboring agents is reduced, our solution performs moderately in
terms of utility. This is can be explained by the following:

-     Not all the planning agents having the requested resources are registered in the directory facilitator
      (some of them are selfish and do not like sharing their resources).
-     Even when the initiator agent searches the neighboring agent providing the requested resources
      (the number is reduced), some of the planning agents refuse to participate in the distributed task
      allocation for the simple reason that the resource can be used by itself later.

     Therefore, the probability of finding a solution with a reduced number of neighboring agents is
low. However, when the number of neighboring agents is elevated, there is more chance of finding
a solution, which means among all these neighboring agents, there are at least some that are free
and willing to help the initiator agent. Whenever the number of neighboring agents is elevated (it is
expected that there are many resources), our approach works fine and gives a result similar to that of
the second one [37].
     For more details about the implementation as well as the data used in this paper, a useful link is
shared with the public [39].
 willing to help the initiator agent. Whenever the number of neighboring agents is elevated (it is
 expected that there are many resources), our approach works fine and gives a result similar to that of
 the second one [37].
       For more details about the implementation as well as the data used in this paper, a useful link is
Information
 shared with      11, 271
            2020, the  public [39].                                                             19 of 21



                                                      6           Our Approach
                                                                  GDAP
                                                                  Approach [37]
                                                      5



                                                      4




                                     Execution time
                                                      3



                                                      2



                                                      1


                                                          0       2             4        6       8       10

                                                                          Average number of neighbors
  Information 2020, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                   19 of 21
                   Figure 7. Comparison between the three approaches based on execution time.
                    Figure 7. Comparison between the three approaches based on execution time.
                                                                  Our Approach
                                                      0,7
                                                                  GDAP
                                                                  Approach [37]
                                                      0,6


                                                      0,5
                                     Utility ratio




                                                      0,4


                                                      0,3


                                                      0,2


                                                      0,1


                                                              0       2             4        6       8    10

                                                                           Number of average neigbors

                   Figure 8. Comparison between the three approaches based on the utility ratio.
                     Figure 8. Comparison between the three approaches based on the utility ratio.
7. Conclusions
   7. Conclusions
       In this paper, we consider the problem of multi-agent cooperation systems based on planning
         In this paper,
and distributed        task we    considerThe
                              allocation.     the problem is  of divided
                                                                 multi-agent
                                                                           into cooperation       systems based
                                                                                two parts: agent-based               on planning
                                                                                                                  planning   and
   and   distributed     task   allocation.    The  problem    is  divided   into   two   parts:   agent-based
distributed task allocation. There are many contributions as follows. (1) In the first part, we define the          planning    and
   distributed
planning    agentstask   allocation.
                      based              Therebyare
                               on planning           manyaction
                                                  making     contributions
                                                                    decisionsasthat
                                                                                  follows.
                                                                                      combine (1) deliberation
                                                                                                   In the first part,   we define
                                                                                                                  and reactivity.
   the  planning     agents     based   on   planning    by making    action   decisions     that
(2) In the second part, we determine the distributed task allocation applied by planning agents.    combine     deliberation    and
Toreactivity.
     ensure the(2)communication
                     In the second part,        we determine
                                          protocol’s              the we
                                                        correctness,  distributed
                                                                           specify itaskwithallocation
                                                                                               the Petri applied
                                                                                                            net, andbyweplanning
                                                                                                                           verify
   agents.
some        To ensure
        properties          the computation
                        using    communication   treeprotocol’s
                                                       logic. Ourcorrectness,
                                                                    method can   we  bespecify
                                                                                        used for it with   the the
                                                                                                     solving   Petri  net, and we
                                                                                                                    multi-agent
   verify some
planning           properties
            problem,      in which using   computation
                                      agents               tree logic. Our
                                               can plan cooperatively         method
                                                                           more          canPlanning
                                                                                  flexibly.    be used for    solving
                                                                                                           agents       themore
                                                                                                                   behave    multi-
asagent
    though planning
              they areproblem,
                           thinking,inbywhichmakingagents   can plan
                                                      decisions   aboutcooperatively
                                                                          task allocation  more
                                                                                              and flexibly.
                                                                                                     predicting Planning    agents
                                                                                                                   the effects  of
   behave    more
their decisions.     as  though     they   are thinking,   by  making   decisions     about   task   allocation   and   predicting
   theThe
        effects of their decisions.
            experimental       results prove that the proposed approach has good performance. The main goals
of our The     experimental
         solution   are to ensure  results   prove that
                                       robustness    (the the  proposed
                                                          formal            approach
                                                                   verification          has good
                                                                                  of certain           performance.
                                                                                               properties                The main
                                                                                                             that demonstrate
   goals   of our    solution     are  to   ensure  robustness     (the formal     verification
the correct behaviour of the system based on computation tree logic), reliability (even if an agent of  certain   properties    that
isdemonstrate
    unable to xecutethe correct     behaviour
                              a task,   it can beof done
                                                    the system    based on
                                                           by another),       computation
                                                                            scalability   (theretreenologic),
                                                                                                         limitreliability  (even if
                                                                                                                to the possible
   an agent
agents         is unable
          or tasks    that canto execute
                                  be added), a task,  it can (the
                                                 openness     be done   bycanother),
                                                                   agents        join orscalability       (there no
                                                                                           leave the system           limitime),
                                                                                                                   at any    to the
communication reduction (minimal exchanged messages), and structure flexibility (there is no need any
   possible   agents    or   tasks  that  can  be added),    openness   (the  agents    can  join   or leave  the   system   at to
betime),   communication
     organized    in groups).reduction (minimal exchanged messages), and structure flexibility (there is no
   need   to be organized
       Furthermore,             in groups).
                          several   issues are worth future research. Fault tolerance is a crucial point to study;
it can be considered in futureissues
         Furthermore,        several     work.are worth future research. Fault tolerance is a crucial point to study;
   it can be considered in future work.

  Acknowledgments: The authors gratefully acknowledge the approval and the support of this research study by
  the grant no-7142-CIT-2017-1-7-F-from the Deanship of Scientific Research at Northern Border University, Arar,
  K.S.A.

  Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

  References
Information 2020, 11, 271                                                                                       20 of 21



Acknowledgments: The authors gratefully acknowledge the approval and the support of this research study
by the grant no-7142-CIT-2017-1-7-F-from the Deanship of Scientific Research at Northern Border University,
Arar, K.S.A.
Conflicts of Interest: The author declares no conflict of interest.

References
1.    Aramrattana, M.; Andersson, A.; Reichenberg, F.; Mellegård, N.; Burden, H. Testing cooperative intelligent
      transport systems in distributed simulators. Transp. Res. Part F Traffic Psychol. Behav. 2019, 65, 206–216.
      [CrossRef]
2.    Viloria, A.; Rodado, D.; Lezama, O. Recovery of scientific data using Intelligent Distributed Data Warehouse.
      Procedia Comput. Sci. 2019, 151, 1249–1254. [CrossRef]
3.    Zhen, Z.; Zhu, P.; Xue, Y.; Ji, Y. Distributed intelligent self-organized mission planning of multi-UAV for
      dynamic targets cooperative search-attack. Chin. J. Aeronaut. 2019, 32, 2706–2716. [CrossRef]
4.    Jacobson, D.; Dickerman, L. Distributed intelligence: A critical piece of the microgrid puzzle. Electr. J. 2019,
      32, 10–13. [CrossRef]
5.    Jafari, M.; Xu, H. A biologically-inspired distributed fault tolerant flocking control for multi-agent system in
      presence of uncertain dynamics and unknown disturbance. Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell. 2019, 79, 1–12. [CrossRef]
6.    Briones, A.; Mezquita, Y.; Garzón, J.; Prieto, J.; Corchado, J. Intelligent multi-agent system for water reduction
      in automotive irrigation processes. Procedia Comput. Sci. 2019, 151, 971–976. [CrossRef]
7.    Kovalenko, I.; Tilbury, D.; Barton, K. The model-based product agent: A control oriented architecture for
      intelligent products in multi-agent manufacturing systems. Control Eng. Pract. 2019, 86, 105–117. [CrossRef]
8.    Panteleev, M.G. Advanced Iterative Action Planning for Intelligent Real-Time Agents. Procedia Comput. Sci.
      2019, 150, 244–252. [CrossRef]
9.    Fu, Q.; Du, L.; Xu, G.; Wu, J.; Yu, P. Consensus control for multi-agent systems with distributed parameter
      models. Neurocomputing 2018, 308, 58–64. [CrossRef]
10.   Pupkov, K.A.; Fadi, I. Collective Opinion Formation as a Set of Intelligent Agents to Achieve the Goal.
      Procedia Comput. Sci. 2019, 150, 216–222. [CrossRef]
11.   Ghadimi, P.; Wang, C.; Lim, M.; Heavey, C. Intelligent sustainable supplier selection using multi-agent
      technology: Theory and application for Industry 4.0 supply chains. Comput. Ind. Eng. 2019, 127, 588–600.
      [CrossRef]
12.   Salazar, L.; Mayer, F.; Schütz, D.; Heuser, B. Platform Independent Multi-Agent System for Robust Networks
      of Production Systems. IFAC-PapersOnLine 2018, 51, 1261–1268. [CrossRef]
13.   Komenda, A.; Novák, P.; Pěchouček, M. Domain-independent multi-agent plan repair. J. Netw. Comput. Appl.
      2014, 37, 76–88. [CrossRef]
14.   Geanakoplos, J.; Karatzas, I.; Shubik, M.; Sudderth, W. Inflationary equilibrium in a stochastic economy with
      independent agents. J. Math. Econ. 2014, 52, 1–11. [CrossRef]
15.   Qu, G.; Brown, D.; Li, N. Distributed greedy algorithm for multi-agent task assignment problem with
      submodular utility functions. Automatica 2019, 105, 206–215. [CrossRef]
16.   Trujillo, M.A.; Becerra, H.M.; Gómez-Gutiérrez, D.; Ruiz-León, J.; Ramírez-Treviño, A. Priority Task-Based
      Formation Control and Obstacle Avoidance of Holonomic Agents with Continuous Control Inputs.
      IFAC-PapersOnLine 2018, 51, 216–222. [CrossRef]
17.   Vorobiev, V. Inference algorithm for teams of robots using local interaction. Procedia Comput. Sci. 2018, 123,
      507–511. [CrossRef]
18.   An, B.; Liu, G.; Tan, C. Group consensus control for networked multi-agent systems with communication
      delays. ISA Trans. 2018, 76, 78–87. [CrossRef]
19.   Wang, D.; Wang, Z.; Chen, M.; Wang, W. Distributed optimization for multi-agent systems with constraints
      set and communication time-delay over a directed graph. Inf. Sci. 2018, 438, 1–14. [CrossRef]
20.   Zhao, L.; Yang, G. End to end communication rate-based adaptive fault tolerant control of multi-agent
      systems under unreliable interconnections. Inf. Sci. 2018, 460–461, 331–345. [CrossRef]
21.   Torreño, A.; Sapena, Ó.; Onaindia, E. FMAP: A platform for the development of distributed multi-agent
      planning systems. Knowl.-Based Syst. 2018, 145, 166–168.
Information 2020, 11, 271                                                                                    21 of 21



22.   Tucnik, P.; Nachazel, T.; Cech, P.; Bures, V. Comparative analysis of selected path-planning approaches in
      large-scale multi-agent-based environments. Expert Syst. Appl. 2018, 113, 415–427. [CrossRef]
23.   Zhen, Z.; Xing, D.; Gao, C. Cooperative search-attack mission planning for multi-UAV based on intelligent
      self-organized algorithm. Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 2018, 76, 402–411. [CrossRef]
24.   Brambilla, M.; Ferrante, E.; Birattari, M.; Dorigo, M. Swarm Robotics: A Review from the Swarm Engineering
      Perspective. Swarm Intell. 2013, 7, 1–41. [CrossRef]
25.   Liu, Y.; Song, R.; Bucknall, R.; Zhang, X. Intelligent multi-task allocation and planning for multiple unmanned
      surface vehicles (USVs) using self-organising maps and fast marching method. Inf. Sci. 2019, 496, 180–197.
      [CrossRef]
26.   Yao, F.; Li, J.; Chen, Y.; Chu, X.; Zhao, B. Task allocation strategies for cooperative task planning of
      multi-autonomous satellite constellation. Adv. Space Res. 2019, 63, 1073–1084. [CrossRef]
27.   Chen, X.; Zhang, P.; Du, G.; Li, F. A distributed method for dynamic multi-robot task allocation problems
      with critical time constraints. Robot. Auton. Syst. 2019, 118, 31–46. [CrossRef]
28.   Mahi, M.; Baykan, O.; Kodaz, H. A new approach based on particle swarm optimization algorithm for
      solving data allocation problem. Appl. Soft Comput. 2018, 62, 571–578. [CrossRef]
29.   Saxena, K.; Abhyankar, A. Agent based bilateral transactive market for emerging distribution system
      considering imbalances. Sustain. Energy Grids Netw. 2019, 18, 100203. [CrossRef]
30.   Liang, H.; Kang, F. A novel task optimal allocation approach based on Contract Net Protocol for Agent-oriented
      UUV swarm system modeling. Optik 2016, 127, 3928–3933. [CrossRef]
31.   Panescu, D.; Pascal, C. Holonic coordination obtained by joining the contract net protocol with constraint
      satisfaction. Comput. Ind. 2016, 81, 36–46. [CrossRef]
32.   Momen, S. Ant-inspired Decentralized Task Allocation Strategy in Groups of Mobile Agents. Procedia Comput. Sci.
      2013, 20, 169–176. [CrossRef]
33.   Shehory, O.; Kraus, S. Methods for task allocation via agent coalition formation. Artif. Intell. 1998, 101,
      165–200. [CrossRef]
34.   Hruz, B.; Zhou, M. Modeling and Control of Discrete-Event Dynamic Systems with Petri Nets and Other Tools;
      Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2007.
35.   Gharbi, A.; Gharsellaoui, H.; Ben Ahmed, S. Multi-Agent control system. In Proceedings of the 9th International
      Conference on Software Engineering and Applications (ICSOFT-EA), Vienna, Austria, 29–31 August 2014;
      pp. 117–124.
36.   Homepage of ITS-Tools. Available online: https://lip6.github.io/ITSTools-web (accessed on 8 November 2019).
37.   Ben Noureddine, D.; Gharbi, A.; Ben Ahmed, S. A Social Multi-Agent Cooperation System based on Planning and
      Distributed Task Allocation: Real Case Study. In Proceedings of the ICSOFT, Porto, Portugal, 26–28 July 2018;
      pp. 483–493.
38.   Weerdt, M.; Zhang, Y.; Klos, T. Distributed task allocation in social networks. In Proceedings of the 6th
      Automous Agents and Multiagent Systems (AAMAS 2007), Honolulu, HI, USA, 14–18 May 2007; pp. 500–507.
39.   Available online: https://drive.google.com/open?id=1SYKk2CyxpAgq6o-n2VqZ7gOuwRPj3qJw (accessed on
      10 May 2020).

                            © 2020 by the author. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
                            article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
                            (CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
