Article

An SQL Query Description Problem with AI Assistance for an
SQL Programming Learning Assistant System
Ni Wayan Wardani 1,2 , Nobuo Funabiki 1, *, Htoo Htoo Sandi Kyaw 1 , Zihao Zhu 1 , I Nyoman Darma Kotama 1,2 ,
Putu Sugiartawan 1,2 and I Nyoman Agus Suarya Putra 3

                                         1   Graduate School of Environmental, Life, Natural Science and Technology, Okayama University,
                                             Okayama 700-8530, Japan; pj5w1e4c@s.okayama-u.ac.jp (N.W.W.); htoohtoo@okayama-u.ac.jp (H.H.S.K.);
                                             pjco5fyn@s.okayama-u.ac.jp (Z.Z.); p18z9yov@s.okayama-u.ac.jp (P.S.)
                                         2   Faculty of Technology and Information, Indonesian Institute of Business and Technology,
                                             Denpasar 80225, Indonesia
                                         3   Faculty of Business and Creative Design, Indonesian Institute of Business and Technology,
                                             Denpasar 80225, Indonesia; nyomansuarya@instiki.ac.id
                                         *   Correspondence: funabiki@okayama-u.ac.jp


                                         Abstract
                                         Today, relational databases are widely used in information systems. SQL (structured
                                         query language) is taught extensively in universities and professional schools across the
                                         globe as a programming language for its data management and accesses. Previously,
                                         we have studied a web-based programming learning assistant system (PLAS) to help
                                         novice students learn popular programming languages by themselves through solving
                                         various types of exercises. For SQL programming, we have implemented the grammar-
                                         concept understanding problem (GUP) and the comment insertion problem (CIP) for
                                         its initial studies. In this paper, we propose an SQL Query Description Problem (SDP)
                                         as a new exercise type for describing the SQL query to a specified request in a MySQL
                                         database system. To reduce teachers’ preparation workloads, we integrate a generative
                                         AI-assisted SQL query generator to automatically generate a new SDP instance with a
                                         given dataset. An SDP instance consists of a table, a set of questions and corresponding
                                         queries. Answer correctness is determined by enhanced string matching against an answer
                                         module that includes multiple semantically equivalent canonical queries. For evaluation,
                                         we generated 11 SDP instances on basic topics using the generator, where we found
                                         that Gemini 3.0 Pro exhibited higher pedagogical consistency compared to ChatGPT-5.0,
                                         achieving perfect scores in Sensibleness, Topicality, and Readiness metrics. Then, we
                                         assigned the generated instances to 32 undergraduate students at the Indonesian Institute
                                         of Business and Technology (INSTIKI). The results showed an average correct answer rate of
                                         95.2% and a mean SUS score of 78, which demonstrates strong initial student performance
                                         and system acceptance.
Academic Editors: Razi Iqbal and
Shereen Ismail                           Keywords: database programming; SQL query description problem (SDP); self-study;
Received: 13 November 2025
                                         programming learning assistant system (PLAS); generative AI
Revised: 30 December 2025
Accepted: 31 December 2025
Published: 9 January 2026
Copyright: © 2026 by the authors.        1. Introduction
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
                                              Today, relational databasesplay a central roles in information systems by managing
This article is an open access article
                                         large volumes of data efficiently. Database programming using Structured Query Language
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
                                         (SQL) has become a core skill for data scientists and software developers [1]. A lot of
Attribution (CC BY) license.             universities and professional schools offer courses related to SQL in their curricula, teaching


Information 2026, 17, 65                                                                                     https://doi.org/10.3390/info17010065
Information 2026, 17, 65                                                                                           2 of 33



                           data definitions, retrievals, and manipulations [2–6]. However, despite its importance,
                           database programming is not offered in many universities, and novice students often
                           struggle to write correct SQL queries because of their complexity, making both syntactic
                           and semantic mistakes that hinder learning progress [7–9].
                                The difficulties faced by novice students can be effectively addressed through the lens
                           of Cognitive Load Theory (CLT). Novice learners often struggle with high intrinsic cognitive
                           load stemming from the inherent complexity of SQL logic, which is frequently compounded
                           by the extraneous cognitive load associated with configuring and managing complex
                           database environments. To facilitate effective learning, it is crucial to minimize these
                           extraneous demands and manage intrinsic difficulty through scaffolding, thereby freeing
                           up working memory resources for germane load—the active construction of knowledge
                           schemas. Guided by these principles, this study aims to optimize the learning process by
                           providing a streamlined, web-based environment and structurally sequenced exercises.
                                To address these cognitive load challenges in SQL learning, we have developed
                           a web-based Programming Learning Assistant System (PLAS) to support self-study of
                           popular programming languages such as Java, Python, and JavaScript. PLAS is designed
                           and implemented to help novice students study programming by themselves through
                           solving various types of exercises. Among them, we implemented the grammar-concept
                           understanding problem (GUP) and the comment insertion problem (CIP) for learning
                           keyword meaning and basic syntax of SQL programming as its initial studies. These
                           exercises may help students in initial recognition and grammar understanding. However,
                           they do not provide realistic practices in composing SQL queries for database tables.
                                To provide realistic practice, instructors encounter challenges when designing varied
                           SQL programming exercises. This task typically entails constructing diverse database
                           schemas and crafting matching queries, which is time-consuming and often repetitive [10].
                           Recent studies show that automatic schema generation by generative AI such as ChatGPT-
                           3.5 can produce reasonable cores but often inconsistent relationships and redundancy,
                           indicating the need for careful validation [10]. Thus, teachers need tools that can reduce
                           manual works while ensuring schema correctness and pedagogical values.
                                In this paper, we propose an SQL Query Description Problem (SDP) as a new exercise
                           type inside PLAS. An SDP instance contains a database table schema and a set of questions
                           that require students to write SQL queries for data retrieval or manipulation with their
                           correct answers. Student answers are evaluated automatically using enhanced string match-
                           ing against a bank of canonical solutions that includes multiple semantically equivalent
                           variants. To reduce preparation efforts and increase variety, we also propose a generative
                           AI-assisted SQL query generator that combines large human-labelled schema collections
                           called Spider dataset [11] with popular generative AI models such as ChatGPT 5.0 [12] and
                           Gemini 3.0 Pro [13] to produce candidate schemas, questions, and reference SQL queries to
                           the dataset.
                                For evaluation, we generated 11 SDP instances on fundamental SQL topics using
                           the generator with the two generative AI models. The correctness of them was manually
                           validated by teachers before use. We found that ChatGPT-5.0 demonstrated superior
                           technical efficiency with fewer execution errors and a lower mean error rate, making it
                           highly effective for rapid query generation. However, Gemini 3.0 Pro emerged as the
                           more consistent model for pedagogical purposes, achieving perfect scores in Sensibleness,
                           Topicality, and Readiness with absolute inter-rater consensus (κ = 1.00). While Gemini
                           3.0 Pro required slightly more manual syntax debugging than ChatGPT-5.0, its superior
                           instructional alignment and logical stability make it more suitable for the standardized
                           requirements of this study. (κ = 1.00). While Gemini 3.0 Pro required slightly more




                                                                                      https://doi.org/10.3390/info17010065
Information 2026, 17, 65                                                                                             3 of 33



                           manual syntax debugging than ChatGPT-5.0, its superior instructional alignment and
                           logical stability make it more suitable for the standardized requirements of this study.
                                Then, we assigned the SDP instances to 32 undergraduate students at the Indonesian
                           Institute of Business and Technology (INSTIKI) during a 120-min class. Our analysis
                           of student performances showed that the average correct answer rate was 95.2% and
                           the average number of submissions was 1.56 per question. The usability test using a
                           questionnaire yielded 78 (Grade B) for the average SUS score. These results indicate that
                           the proposed SDP with the AI-assisted generator using Gemini 3.0 Pro can be a reliable
                           solution for SQL programming studies by novice students.

                           1.1. Contributions of This Study
                                To clarify the novelty of this work, the unique contributions of this study compared to
                           prior research in the PLAS ecosystem and existing SQL learning tools are as follows:
                           1.   Introduction of SDP: We propose the SQL Query Description Problem (SDP) as a new
                                exercise type that focuses on logical–semantic mapping, bridging the gap between
                                natural language requirements and SQL syntax.
                           2.   LLM-based Automation: We develop a structured prompting framework that enables
                                the automated generation of diverse SQL exercises, significantly reducing manual
                                effort for instructors compared to previous manual methods used in GUP and CIP.
                           3.   Enhanced Assessment Methodology: We introduce an enhanced string-matching
                                logic for the automated evaluation of student answers. This methodology accounts for
                                multiple semantically equivalent canonical solutions and normalizes syntactic varia-
                                tions, ensuring a robust and reliable assessment without the need for manual grading.
                           4.   Comparative Generative AI Evaluation: We provide a detailed comparative evalua-
                                tion of Gemini 3.0 Pro and ChatGPT-5.0 specifically for generating educational SQL
                                content, using metrics that ensure pedagogical suitability.
                           5.   Educational Feasibility: We demonstrate the practical utility of the system through
                                an empirical study involving 32 students, confirming system acceptance and task-
                                solving performance.

                           1.2. Paper Organization
                                The remaining sections of this paper are organized as follows: Section 2 overviews
                           related works in literature. Section 3 details the main software and datasets used. Section 4
                           provides an overview of the existing PLAS system. Section 5 presents the SQL Query
                           Description Problem (SDP) for database programming. Section 6 describes the methodology
                           and the experimental design. Section 7 evaluates the proposal. Section 8 discusses the
                           findings, implications, and limitations. Section 9 concludes this paper with future works.

                           2. Related Works
                                In this section, we introduce works in the literature related to this study.

                           2.1. SQL Programming Learning
                                First, we introduce works on SQL programming learning.
                                In [3], Garner et al. introduced SQL in Steps (SiS) as an online environment that
                           combines a graphical user interface with a textual representation for improving SQL
                           learning. SiS simplifies the transition from graphical to textual interfaces, making the
                           transition seamless. Their study on the application to first-year undergraduates confirmed
                           its potential.
                                In [14], Mitrovic et al. presented Intelligent Teaching System (ITS) research that de-
                           velops electronic tutors that mimic one-on-one instruction with a human tutor. Their SQL-



                                                                                        https://doi.org/10.3390/info17010065
Information 2026, 17, 65                                                                                             4 of 33



                           Tutor is designed as a practice environment, assuming students have completed database
                           management courses. Although it only covers SQL SELECT statements, the system’s sig-
                           nificance can be extended to other SQL commands and relational database languages, as
                           queries pose significant challenges for students.
                                In [15], Akhuseyinoglu et al. introduced Database Query Analyzer (DBQA) as a
                           learning tool that uses interactive data visualizations to demonstrate effects of clauses
                           and conditions on SQL SELECT statements. This tool provides result sets similar to those
                           maintained by a database management system during query processing. DBQA modifies
                           the result set according to each clause and condition, highlighting the clause currently
                           being processed.
                                Overall, research on SQL learning shows that a variety of tools and systems have been
                           developed to improve students’ comprehension and proficiency in learning SQL. They
                           include interactive visualizations that show the effects of clauses in queries and graphical
                           interfaces that make the transition easier.

                           2.2. Generative AI for Programming Education
                                Second, we introduce works on use of generative AI models for programming education.
                                In [16], Luckin et al. showed that by building a proper AI model, educational contents
                           can be made more engaging and effective to accomplish goals of individualized education.
                                In [17], Chen et al. analysed the impact of AI on education, verifying that AI has
                           been widely used in education, helping teachers work more effectively, and improving the
                           overall quality of teaching.
                                In [18], Baidoo-Anu explored potential benefits and limitations of ChatGPT in enhanc-
                           ing teaching and learning. They provided recommendations on how ChatGPT can be used
                           to maximize its impacts on teaching and learning.
                                In [19], Choi et al. showed that GPT-5 represents a significant advancement in educa-
                           tional language models, addressing shortcomings such as hallucinations and pedagogical
                           alignment. This approach offers new opportunities across various subjects and learning
                           profiles. Despite limited empirical studies, the evidence indicates that GPT-5 aligns with
                           learning objectives and adapts to diverse educational needs.
                                Based on the research mentioned above, it is clear that generative AI models have
                           significant impacts on various educational needs, such as helping teachers work more
                           effectively in making and presenting learning content, thereby improving the quality
                           of teaching.

                           2.3. Generative AI for Query Generation
                                 Third, we introduce works on use of generative AI model for query generations.
                                 In [20], Pornphol et al. verified the relational completeness of SQL query codes
                           generated by ChatGPT as one of the most widely used generative AI models. ChatGPT gen-
                           erated relational algebra, relational calculus, and SQL statements for five natural language
                           test questions.
                                 In [21], Li et al. presented a method for automatic test case development that initially
                           creates a database and subsequently employs a generative AI model to ascertain the ground
                           truth, defined as the anticipated execution outcomes of the corresponding SQL query on
                           this database.
                                 Together, these studies underscore the potential of generative AI models to stream-
                           line query generations and validations, improving efficiency and reliability in database
                           management systems while addressing challenges in automation and accuracy.

                           2.4. Reducing Teacher Workloads
                                Fourth, we introduce works on use of generative AI model for reducing teacher workloads.


                                                                                        https://doi.org/10.3390/info17010065
Information 2026, 17, 65                                                                                            5 of 33



                                 In [22], Gupta et al. investigated impacts of generative AI models on teacher produc-
                           tivity in higher education, highlighting their potential to save time and reduce workloads.
                           They revealed that generative AI models streamline administrative tasks, enhance teaching
                           efficiency, and optimize assessment processes. This research contributes to the discourse
                           on their roles in sustainable productivity improvements.
                                 In [23], Hashem et al. explored the use of ChatGPT in secondary schools to reduce
                           teacher burnouts. They focused on the creation of materials and lesson plans, which are
                           crucial factors causing burnouts. This study uses customized questions for science, math,
                           and English classes, evaluating ChatGPT abilities in individualized planning and content
                           creations. It emphasized benefits of task-specific suggestions and AI–human collaborations
                           for personalized planning, aligning with UAE’s AI integration goals.
                                 Both studies highlighted significant roles of generative AI models in reducing teacher
                           workloads and improving productivity. Together, these studies showed how they can
                           effectively support teachers, enabling them to focus more on teaching and less on time-
                           consuming administrative tasks.

                           2.5. Cognitive Load Theory in Programming Learning
                                 In [24], Mason et al. redesigned an introductory database course using Cognitive
                           Load Theory (CLT) to address high failure rates. By re-sequencing content, utilizing
                           segmentation, and replacing visual tools with raw SQL to reduce extraneous load, they
                           significantly improved student outcomes. Notably, final exam scores increased and the
                           failure rate dropped from 42% to 8%.
                                 In [25], Yousoof et al. proposed a framework to mitigate working memory limitations
                           in programming education. By employing concept maps that mirror long-term memory
                           schemas, alongside part-code methods and information filtering, the approach segments
                           information effectively. This visualization strategy significantly reduces cognitive load and
                           split attention for novice learners.
                                 While both studies validate CLT in database and programming contexts, there remains
                           a paucity of research regarding its application in AI-assisted SQL programming environ-
                           ments. Building upon these findings, this study extends the CLT framework to SQL query
                           formulation, specifically aiming to reduce cognitive load through the proposed SDP, which
                           utilizes generative AI to provide scaffolded practice and immediate feedback.

                           2.6. Formative Assessment Theory
                                Ma et al. [26] utilize correct answer rates as a formative indicator to assess knowledge
                           mastery. By visualizing these rates at the class level, they identify common misconcep-
                           tions and provide targeted feedback to enable students to recognize weaknesses and
                           improve performance.
                                Similarly, Sudo et al. [27] employ correct answer rates to monitor learner under-
                           standing and evaluate instructional interventions. Their findings confirm that quantita-
                           tive performance indicators are effective in supporting learning diagnosis and driving
                           instructional improvement.
                                Harvey and Aggarwal [28] investigate submission timing as a behavioral indicator in
                           programming education. They found that early submissions significantly correlate with
                           higher exam scores, suggesting that submission time is a meaningful predictor of student
                           engagement and learning outcomes.
                                In the specific context of SQL learning, Ma et al. [26] further interpret correct answer
                           rates through CLT. They posit that low correct rates indicate high cognitive burden, while
                           improvements suggest efficient schema construction, thereby guiding the reduction of
                           extraneous cognitive load.



                                                                                       https://doi.org/10.3390/info17010065
Information 2026, 17, 65                                                                                            6 of 33



                                In conclusion, these studies collectively demonstrate that quantitative metrics—ranging
                           from accuracy rates to submission timing—serve as vital diagnostic tools. By leveraging
                           these indicators, teachers can effectively monitor cognitive load, identify behavioral pat-
                           terns, and provide timely interventions to support student mastery.

                           3. Software and Dataset
                                In this section, we describe the main software tools and datasets used in the proposal.

                           3.1. Generative AI
                                Generative Artificial Intelligence (AI) models, particularly those based on the Trans-
                           former architecture introduced in 2017 [29], have demonstrated exceptional capabilities
                           in natural language processing and content creation. This presents a significant opportu-
                           nity for automation and AI-powered content creation in education, which is leveraged in
                           this study to reduce the workload of teachers. The LLM models used in this study are
                           as follows:
                                OpenAI’s GPT-5: Launched in August 2025, this model offers advanced language
                           understanding, multi-level reasoning, and programming support [12]. A related model,
                           ChatGPT-3.5, has shown an 87% accuracy rate in generating and correcting SQL syntax [30].
                                Google’s Gemini 3.0 Pro: Released in November 2025, this multimodal generative AI
                           model is known for its strong reasoning, comprehension, and coding capabilities, capable
                           of handling complex problems and supporting contexts up to one million tokens [13].
                           A previous version, Gemini 1.0 Pro, has shown an 80% accuracy rate in SQL syntax
                           generation [30].

                           3.2. Spider Dataset
                                 The Spider dataset is a major breakthrough in the fields of natural language processing
                           (NLP) and text-to-SQL system developments, designed to handle complex, cross-domain
                           semantic parsing tasks. A team in Department of Computer Science at Yale University
                           created the Spider dataset, which includes 10,181 natural language questions and 5693
                           unique SQL queries. They are carefully labelled by 11 undergraduate students, covering
                           200 databases with many tables from 138 different domains like education, aviation, and
                           entertainment [11]. Spider dataset is unique because it uses different databases for training
                           and testing, which allows a generative AI model to adapt to new structures and questions,
                           unlike older datasets like ATIS or WikiSQL that usually focus on matching patterns within
                           one area. With a state-of-the-art model accuracy of only 12.4% in the “split database”
                           setting, Spider offers a new challenge that emphasizes the importance of true semantic
                           understanding, rather than rote memorization, and is publicly available at https://yale-
                           lily.github.io/spider (accessed on 5 August 2025) to support [11].
                                 From 200 databases with diverse domains, we selected college_2 database schema.
                           The database schema for college_2 consists of 11 tables and approximately 30,000 data
                           entries. The domain is familiar for teachers and students, which is relevant to daily
                           life and educational environments [31]. Teachers can utilize this dataset to illustrate
                           practical applications of SQL in educational data analysis, while students can learn to
                           interpret realistic database schemas and complete challenging tasks, thereby enhancing
                           their understanding of SQL programming and data processing. The schema of college_2
                           can be found in Appendix B.

                           4. Review of Programming Learning Assistant System
                                In this section, we briefly review our programming learning assistant system (PLAS)
                           and its application to learning in our previous studies.



                                                                                       https://doi.org/10.3390/info17010065
Information 2026, 17, 65                                                                                            7 of 33



                           4.1. System Overview
                               PLAS is a self-learning web-based platform that supports well-known programming
                           languages like C, Java, and Python. For teachers, it supports generating instances and
                           analysing students’ responses. For students, it supports practicing and using the system.
                           An overview of the software architecture in PLAS is shown in Figure 1.




                           Figure 1. System overview of PLAS.

                           4.2. Exercise Problems
                                 PLAS provides a range of programming exercise tasks with diverse difficulty levels
                           and objectives. The Element fill-in-blank problem (EFP) requires students to complete
                           absent elements in given source code [32]. The Grammar-concept understanding problem
                           (GUP) requires students to respond to inquiries regarding the grammar within source code
                           or libraries [33]. The Value trace problem (VTP) requires students to ascertain the values of
                           essential variables or anticipated results [34].
                                 In our preliminary applications of PLAS to database programming learning, the GUP
                           was adopted to understand grammatical concepts, the Comment Insertion Problem (CIP)
                           was used to understand the structures and logics of source code, and the SQL Query
                           Description Problem (SDP) was used to understand basic syntax of SQL database pro-
                           gramming for novice students to perform queries ranging from simple to complex. This
                           step-by-step learning approach allows students to systematically improve their fundamen-
                           tal database programming competencies.

                           4.3. Technical Implementation of PLAS
                                The PLAS platform was designed as a web-based self-directed learning environment
                           accessible via a web browser. The interface was implemented utilizing HTML5, CSS,
                           and JavaScript to facilitate access to the exercises, allowing fast responses to inputs for
                           immediate feedback. User interaction and data storage capabilities are executed on a
                           browser with JavaScript. This design streamlines deployment and maintenance.
                                The exercises can be developed and managed by teachers through an administrative
                           interface that enables them to establish question instances, categorize them, and provide
                           correct answers along with validation criteria. Upon answer submission by a student,
                           the system automatically compares them with the stored correct answers, identifies the
                           incorrect ones, and documents them for future review.
                                Students engage with the PLAS platform using a web browser to complete the exer-
                           cises. The platform stores the related data, including the submission and answer histories,
                           which will be utilized to assess student progress and address specific challenges.


                                                                                       https://doi.org/10.3390/info17010065
Information 2026, 17, 65                                                                                            8 of 33



                           4.4. Instance Generation Functions
                                The instance generator has been implemented for each exercise type and language
                           within PLAS. It operates together with the settings for different types of exercise problems.
                           Figure 2 shows how it processes and masks the answers for EFP.
                                In this process, teachers first input a source code according to the topic. Then, the
                           generator masks the correct answers and generates the corresponding HTML, CSS, and
                           JavaScript files before presenting them to students. During exercise executions, student
                           inputs are evaluated through string matching against the correct answers stored in the
                           program. The same mechanism is applied to generating instances for other exercise types.
                           On the student side, the masked parts in EFP are displayed as blank input fields, allowing
                           learners to fill in their answers directly through the web interface.




                           Figure 2. Example of EFP instance generation.

                           5. Proposal of SQL Query Description Problem
                                In this section, we present the SQL Query Description Problem (SDP) with a generative
                           AI-assisted SQL query generator.

                           5.1. Overview
                                 SDP with the generator is designed to help teachers generate practical SQL exercises
                           efficiently and allow students to practice query writing interactively. Figure 3 illustrates
                           the workflow of the proposed SDP.
                                 First, teachers use the generator to automatically create new SDP instances. Teachers
                           begin by selecting a learning topic such as SELECT, UPDATE, or JOIN and choosing a preferred
                           generative AI model such as ChatGPT 5.0 or Gemini 3.0 Pro. Based on these inputs, the
                           generator generates pairs of questions and their corresponding SQL queries by applying
                           prompt engineering techniques to the model.
                                 The generated question–answer pairs should be checked by teachers for syntactic
                           correctness and query running ability within a MySQL environment. Only questions that
                           pass this verification can be included for further reviews. Teachers then perform manual
                           validations to ensure that the generated contents align with the course materials and the
                           intended difficulty levels. Once validated, these contents are exported into SDP instance
                           files, ready to be uploaded into PLAS.
                                 In this paper, we extended the existing instance generator of PLAS to support the
                           SQL-specific structure in SDP, using the available SQL keywords listed in Appendix A as a
                           reference. Each validated SDP instance consists of a database schema, multiple question




                                                                                       https://doi.org/10.3390/info17010065
Information 2026, 17, 65                                                                                             9 of 33



                           statements, and their correct query answers. Students access these SDP exercises through
                           the PLAS user interface on a browser.




                           Figure 3. Overview of proposal.

                           5.2. Generative AI-Assisted SQL Query Generator
                                The generative AI-assisted SQL query generator is developed to support teachers
                           in producing diverse and practical SDP instances. It leverages generative AI models to
                           automatically generate question–answer pairs based on real database schemas. Teachers
                           can use this generator through a simple graphical interface, as shown in Figure 4. They
                           need to select a desired SQL topic such as SELECT, UPDATE, or JOIN and specifying the
                           generative AI model to use. The generator then creates a corresponding set of SQL exercises
                           that consist of question statements and correct SQL queries.
                                Once teachers start the generator, it prepares prompts as shown in Table 1, including
                           the schema information and SQL topic instructions. The generated results of question–
                           answer pairs are automatically checked in syntax correctness and running ability on the
                           target MySQL database system. Only the pairs that are executed successfully are saved for
                           teacher validations. Then, teachers should review, edit, or discard generated contents before
                           uploading them to PLAS. This workflow allows for efficient and semi-automated content
                           creations while maintaining human oversights on accuracy and pedagogical consistency.

                           5.2.1. Question-Answer Pair Generation
                                 The question–answer pair generation process relies on Large Language Models (LLMs),
                           specifically ChatGPT 5.0 and Gemini 3.0 Pro, chosen for their strong performances in
                           text generations and structured query formulations. These models can interpret natural
                           language prompts and produce consistent SQL query statements that follow the MySQL
                           syntax rules.
                                 For the input context, we use Spider dataset as a well-known human-labelled dataset
                           for cross-domain SQL generations developed by Yale University [11]. This dataset provides
                           database schemas and query examples across multiple domains, allowing generative AI
                           models to generate realistic questions and accurate queries at various difficulty levels.
                                 Table 1 illustrates the design of a standardized prompt structure used to ensure clarity
                           and output consistency. The prompt instructs the selected generative AI model to produce
                           enhanced question–answer pairs, where each question is accompanied by multiple seman-
                           tically equivalent SQL queries and explanations. This standardized prompting ensures that
                           each generated content includes a mix of basic and intermediate SQL operations, promoting
                           balanced difficulty and comprehensive learning coverage.



                                                                                        https://doi.org/10.3390/info17010065
Information 2026, 17, 65                                                                                               10 of 33




                           Figure 4. User Interface of Generative AI-assisted SQL query generator interface.


                           Table 1. Prompt template for generative AI model to generate SQL question–answer pairs.

                            Prompt Template:
                            “Create 10 SQL questions based on the attached database schema, focusing
                            on [topic], with two levels of difficulty. For each question, provide
                            an explanation and multiple alternative query formulations that are
                            semantically equivalent and yield the same results.”

                           5.2.2. Generated Results
                                 Table 2 presents examples of generated content. In this work, we redefine the tradi-
                           tional concept of a “question–answer pair” to accommodate the flexibility of SQL syntax. In-
                           stead of a single reference answer, each generated instance functions as a question–solution
                           set, consisting of one natural language question and multiple semantically equivalent
                           valid queries.
                                 These examples demonstrate the system’s capability to produce clear, executable SQL
                           queries aligned with educational topics.
                                 Teachers then perform manual validations to confirm that the generated pairs aligned
                           with course objectives and the corresponding schema design. Only validated pairs are
                           subsequently registered as SDP instances in PLAS, where students can access to them for
                           self-learning and practice.


                                                                                           https://doi.org/10.3390/info17010065
Information 2026, 17, 65                                                                                               11 of 33



                           Table 2. Examples of generated question–answer pairs with alternative queries.

                            Level      Question                          Answer (SQL Query)
                            Easy       How can you retrieve the          Option 1: SELECT dept_name FROM department;
                                       names of all departments
                                       from the department table?        Option 2: SELECT d.dept_name FROM depart-
                                                                         ment AS d;
                            Medium Write a query to get                  Option 1:    SELECT s.name, c.title FROM
                                   the names of students                 student s JOIN takes t ON s.ID =
                                   (student.name) and the                t.ID JOIN course c ON t.course_id =
                                   courses they are taking               c.course_id;
                                   (course.title).   Use the             Option 2:    SELECT s.name, c.title FROM
                                   student and takes tables.             student s, takes t, course c WHERE
                                                                         s.ID = t.ID AND t.course_id =
                                                                         c.course_id;

                           5.3. SDP Instance Generation Program
                                 The answer instance generator for PLAS was modified to support the structure and
                           logic of SQL Query Description Problem (SDP), to create new SDP instances that align with
                           SQL query constructions using predefined keywords and question templates. A list of
                           31 keywords and their corresponding questions is shown in Appendix A. Each keyword
                           corresponds to a specific concept in SQL database programming and follows the rules of
                           Data Manipulation Language (DML) and data retrieval operations.
                                 The answer interface generation process ensures that the created instances reflect the
                           real syntax and operations of SQL. Table 3 illustrates how a DML operation, such as INSERT,
                           is used to build an SDP instance. A teacher selects the keyword, defines its question, and
                           registers both in PLAS as a new instance.

                           Table 3. Example of DML-based SDP keyword and question pair.

                            Category               Keyword           Question Example
                            Data Manipula-         INSERT            Write an SQL command to add a new record into
                            tion  Language                           the student table with the values (‘S05’, ‘Lisa’,
                            (DML)                                   ‘Physics’, 3).


                                In addition to DML, the generated SDP instances also include exercises for data re-
                           trieval. They focus on querying and analysing information using commands such as
                           JOIN, ORDER BY, and GROUP BY. Table 4 shows some of them. These additional ones are
                           made so that students will practice writing SQL queries that cover both data manipu-
                           lation and complex retrieval logic, reinforcing their understanding of query syntax and
                           data relationships.

                           Table 4. Examples of keyword and question pairs for data retrieval.

                            Category               Keyword           Question Example
                            Data Retrieval         JOIN              Write a query to display student names and their
                                                                     enrolled course titles by joining the student and
                                                                     takes tables using the student ID.
                            Data Retrieval         ORDER BY          Retrieve all student names and grades from the
                                                                     student table and sort the result in descending
                                                                     order by grade.




                                                                                           https://doi.org/10.3390/info17010065
Information 2026, 17, 65                                                                                           12 of 33



                           5.3.1. SDP Instance Generation Procedure
                                The generation of a new SDP instance running on a web browser involves several steps.
                           The process begins with teachers selecting relevant learning materials from SQL database
                           programming classes, textbooks, or online resources such as [35,36]. These materials serve
                           as the foundation for designing exercises that students can later study and practice.
                                From the materials, teachers need to identify important SQL keywords and choose
                           the corresponding question templates listed in Appendix A. The relevant questions are
                           then selected from the question–answer pairs generated by the generative AI-assisted SQL
                           query generator. Each selected question–answer pair is manually reviewed by teachers to
                           ensure the correctness, clarity, and alignment with the learning objectives.
                                At this step, any redundant or overlapping question–answer pairs are discarded to
                           maintain variety within the exercise set. After validation, the finalized content is compiled
                           into an SDP instance text file that contains all relevant data, including schema information,
                           images, questions, and correct answers.
                                Finally, the answer interface generator automatically produces the necessary HTML,
                           CSS, and JavaScript files from the SDP instance text file [37,38] that can run on a web
                           browser. This integration allows students to access and practice the exercises interactively,
                           with automatic grading and feedback mechanisms built in PLAS.

                           5.3.2. Instance List Page
                                The instance list page allows students to view and manage the assigned SDP instances.
                           Figure 5 shows the layout of this page, where each SDP instance is displayed with its title
                           and progress status. The instances highlighted in green indicate that all the questions
                           in them have been answered correctly by a student, while those in yellow show partial
                           completions. The instances with no highlighting are those that have not yet been attempted.
                           Students are advised to read provided instructions before attempting exercises. This visual
                           feedback mechanism helps learners track their progress and identify which topics require
                           further review.

                           5.3.3. Answer Page
                                 The answer page enables students to input and test SQL queries for questions inter-
                           actively. Figure 6 illustrates the page providing a text input area where students can
                           write the SQL query in response to each question. Upon submission, the JavaScript pro-
                           gram on the page checks the answer using string matching and executes the query to
                           confirm correctness.
                                 Incorrect submissions are highlighted in red, while correct ones appear in white.
                           Students may resubmit their answers until all questions are correctly solved. Each attempt
                           is recorded, including the submission time, the answers, and results, allowing teachers to
                           monitor learning progress and common errors.

                           5.4. SDP Assessment Logic
                                Our SDP assessment system employs a string matching mechanism to validate student
                           submissions. This process compares the student’s query against a comprehensive set of
                           alternative answers—representing semantically equivalent variants—stored within the
                           answer module. This approach allows the system to accept various correct syntactic forms
                           for a single problem.




                                                                                       https://doi.org/10.3390/info17010065
Information 2026, 17, 65                                                                                                  13 of 33




                           Figure 5. Screenshot of the instance list page displaying SDP instances and progress status.




                           Figure 6. Implementation view of the SDP answer page interface.

                           6. Evaluation Setup
                                In this section, we present a methodology and experimental design.

                           6.1. Generative AI-Assisted SQL Query Generator Evaluation Setup
                                To ensure the validity and reliability of the proposed generative AI-assisted SQL
                           query generator, an evaluation framework has been established, encompassing the system
                           configuration and testing scenarios as detailed below.



                                                                                            https://doi.org/10.3390/info17010065
Information 2026, 17, 65                                                                                              14 of 33



                           6.1.1. Evaluation Metrics
                               To assess the quality of problems generated by a generative AI, we used metrics
                           adopted from Sarsa et al. [39], as detailed in Table 5.

                           Table 5. Evaluation metrics for assessing the quality of SQL question–answer pairs generated by
                           generative AI, adapted from Sarsa et al.

                            Aspect              Question                              Description
                            A. Subjective Quality Metrics (Assessed by Experts using a 5-Point Likert Scale)
                                                                                      Assesses the clarity, grammatical
                                                                                      accuracy, and factual correctness
                                                Does the problem description de-
                            Sensibleness                                              of the description.
                                                scribe a sensible problem?
                                                                                      (1: Highly Illogical/5: Highly
                                                                                      Logical)
                                                                                      Assesses the degree of unique-
                                                Are we unable to find the SQL ex-     ness of the SQL query prob-
                            Novelty             ercise via online search (Google)     lem/description.
                                                of the problem statement?             (1: Already Existing/5: Highly
                                                                                      Novel)
                                                                                      Assesses the relevance of the de-
                                            Does the answer to the problem            scription to the requested SQL
                            Topicality:
                                            statement require the primed con-         concepts/keywords.
                            concept/keyword
                                            cept/keyword?                             (1: Not Relevant/5: Highly Rele-
                                                                                      vant)
                                                Does the generated problem            Assesses the quality of integra-
                            Topicality:         statement and solution use the        tion of additional primed ele-
                            extras              extra primed words (e.g., chain-      ments into the output.
                                                of-thought, etc.)?                    (1: Failure/5: Perfect)
                                                                                      Assesses the completeness and
                            Readiness:          Is the answer to the generated        sufficiency of the description as a
                            answer              problem provided?                     learning aid for students.
                                                                                      (1: Not Ready/5: Highly Ready)
                            B. Objective Metric (Numerical)
                                                How many corrections do we
                            Readiness:
                                                need to make to be able to run        Integer
                            runnability
                                                the solution query correctly?


                           6.1.2. Assessment Procedure
                                The evaluation is conducted independently by two (2) lecturers of the Database
                           course each having a minimum of three years of teaching experience at the university
                           level. These assessors serve as expert validators. They are provided with a detailed list
                           of output descriptions and assessment instructions (including the operational definitions
                           above) without being informed whether the descriptions were generated by AI or manually
                           created, to minimize bias.

                           6.1.3. Inter-Rater Reliability
                                Inter-Rater Reliability (IRR) is a crucial statistical measure designed to assess the degree
                           of consistency and agreement among the ratings provided by two or more independent
                           assessors [40]. In this study, the evaluation was conducted independently by two expert
                           validators—Database course lecturers with a minimum of three years of teaching experience.
                           Employing IRR is essential to confirm that the evaluation of the output descriptions is not




                                                                                          https://doi.org/10.3390/info17010065
Information 2026, 17, 65                                                                                           15 of 33



                           reliant on the subjective preferences of a single individual, but represents an objective and
                           reliable consensus among experts.

                           6.1.4. Bias Minimization Procedure
                                To ensure the collected IRR data accurately reflects genuine agreement, strict measures
                           were taken to minimize potential bias. The expert validators performed their evaluation
                           tasks independently of one another. Crucially, they were blinded to the source of the output
                           descriptions—whether they were AI-generated or manually created—thus eliminating the
                           risk of rater expectancy bias. This procedure ensures that the assessment focuses purely on
                           the quality of the description based on the defined operational metrics.

                           6.1.5. Cohen’s Kappa Coefficient
                                 The Cohen’s Kappa (κ) coefficient was selected as the appropriate statistical measure
                           for assessing IRR in this study. Unlike Fleiss’ Kappa, which is used for multiple raters,
                           Cohen’s Kappa is specifically designed to measure the agreement between two independent
                           raters assigning categorical or ordinal ratings to a set of items [41].
                                 Given that the evaluation utilized a 5-point Likert scale, a Weighted Cohen’s Kappa
                           was employed. This variation accounts for the magnitude of disagreement between raters
                           (e.g., a difference between a score of 4 and 5 is penalized less than a difference between
                           1 and 5), which is essential for ordinal data. The coefficient is calculated using the
                           following formula:

                                                                        Po − Pe
                                                                   κ=
                                                                        1 − Pe

                           where Po represents the observed proportion of agreement, and Pe denotes the expected pro-
                           portion of agreement by chance. Based on the interpretation scale by Landis and Koch [42],
                           the global IRR for this study achieved a linear weighted kappa of 0.631, indicating a
                           substantial agreement between the two human raters across all learning topics.

                           6.1.6. Interpretation of Kappa Value
                                The resulting Cohen’s Kappa (κ) value is interpreted to determine the strength of agree-
                           ment between the two human raters. This study adopts the widely accepted interpretation
                           benchmarks proposed by Landis and Koch [42], as summarized in Table 6.
                                A satisfactory level of agreement is typically indicated by a κ value of at least 0.61,
                           corresponding to a substantial level of agreement. In this evaluation, the global weighted
                           kappa value was 0.631. This result meets the threshold for substantial agreement, sup-
                           porting the conclusion that the metrics assessments of the AI models’ outputs demonstrate
                           high reliability and reflect a credible and objective consensus between the raters.

                           6.2. SDP PLAS Evaluation Setup
                                For evaluations, we generated 11 SDP instances with 67 questions. Table 7 lists the
                           topic and the number of questions for each instance. Then, we assigned them to 32 first-
                           year undergraduate students who were taking the SQL database programming course at
                           Indonesian Institute of Business and Technology (INSTIKI), Indonesia. Instances with IDs 1
                           through 5 were included in the midterm exam, whereas instances with IDs 6 through 11
                           are reserved for the final exam. The duration time of midterm exam was 60 min, which
                           was sufficient for students to repeat answer submissions until they got the correct answers.




                                                                                       https://doi.org/10.3390/info17010065
Information 2026, 17, 65                                                                                            16 of 33



                           Table 6. Interpretation of Kappa Values [42].

                            Kappa Value (κ)                                Strength of Agreement
                            <0.00                                          Poor
                            0.00–0.20                                      Slight
                            0.21–0.40                                      Fair
                            0.41–0.60                                      Moderate
                            0.61–0.80                                      Substantial
                            0.81–1.00                                      Almost Perfect


                           Table 7. Generated SDP instances with corresponding SQL topics.

                               No.                      SQL Topic                            Number of Questions
                                1               SELECT Statement                                      5
                                2              UPDATE Statement                                       5
                                3               INSERT Statement                                      8
                                4               DELETE Statement                                      6
                                5                JOIN Operation                                       5
                                6              Character Functions                                    9
                                7               Numeric Functions                                     8
                                8                 Date Functions                                      5
                                9              Aggregate Functions                                    6
                               10               ORDER BY Clause                                       8
                               11          GROUP BY and HAVING Clauses                                4


                           6.2.1. Participants and Demographic Profile
                                The experiment involved 32 undergraduate students enrolled in the “Introduction
                           to Database” course (typically a 1st or 2nd-semester course) at the Indonesian Institute of
                           Business and Technology (INSTIKI) [43]. All participants were novice learners of SQL, as
                           the experiment was conducted immediately following the introductory lectures on basic
                           SQL commands such as SELECT, FROM, WHERE, and JOIN.
                                Demographic information for the participants was as follows: 81.3% were male
                           (26 participants) and 18.7% were female (6 participants). All participants had similar
                           academic backgrounds (Information Technology major) and had no prior professional
                           experience with SQL or relational databases. The homogeneity of the sample (novice level,
                           same major) was intentional to control for prior knowledge variables and focus on the
                           feasibility of the SDP for beginners.
                                The homogeneity was chosen to mitigate confounding variables related to prior SQL
                           expertise, ensuring that the measured learning outcomes were attributable to the SDP
                           method rather than varying skill levels. As discussed in Section 8.5, this intentional
                           restriction limits the external validity, but strengthens the internal validity of the findings
                           regarding the efficacy of SDP for introductory SQL students.

                           6.2.2. Experimental Procedure
                               The experiment was conducted during a scheduled 120-min laboratory session. The
                           procedure adhered to the following steps:
                           Step 1:    Preparation (10 min) : Participants were briefed on the purpose of the study and
                                      the ethical consent form (including anonymity and voluntary participation).
                           Step 2:    Introduction to SDP (10 min): Participants were given a brief tutorial on the
                                      concept of the SDP and how to interact with the web-based PLAS interface.



                                                                                        https://doi.org/10.3390/info17010065
Information 2026, 17, 65                                                                                                 17 of 33



                           Step 3:      Task Execution (60 min): Each participant was instructed to solve a predeter-
                                        mined set of 5 SDP instances (IDs 1–5), comprising a total of 29 questions, using
                                        the proposed learning assistant system. Participants were permitted to solve the
                                        questions in any order.
                           Step 4:      Data Collection (40 min): After completing the tasks, participants were asked to
                                        fill out two standardized instruments:
                                        (a) A survey questionnaire to evaluate system feasibility (correctness rate and
                                            submission times);
                                        (b) The SUS questionnaire to assess the system’s usefulness and usability.
                               All data collection was automated by the PLAS, and the experiment was supervised
                           by one of the co-authors (affiliated with INSTIKI) and a dedicated teaching assistant to
                           ensure standardized conditions across all participants.

                           6.2.3. System Usability Scale
                                Following the assignments, a System Usability Scale (SUS) questionnaire was dis-
                           tributed to the participating students. Originally developed by John Brooke in 1986 [44],
                           the SUS has been known as a simple yet reliable method for measuring the usability of
                           interactive systems. Table 8 presents the 10 SUS questions in this evaluation, each rated
                           on a five-point Likert scale, where 1 represents “Strongly Disagree” and 5 represents
                           “Strongly Agree”.
                                Each answer is scored by a point between 1 and 5. For odd-numbered questions, one
                           point is subtracted from the participant’s response, while for even-numbered ones, the
                           response value is subtracted from five points. The adjusted values are then summed and
                           multiplied by 2.5 to obtain a final score between 0 and 100.
                                For example, if a participant rates question 1 with 4, the adjusted value becomes
                           (4 − 1) = 3. If question 2 is rated with 3, the adjusted value becomes (5 − 3) = 2. These
                           adjusted points are added to the overall score.
                                According to Table 9, a score between 0 and 50.9 is considered “Not Acceptable”, a
                           score between 51 and 70.9 is “Marginal”, and a score ranging from 71 to 100 is “Acceptable”.
                           Table 10 shows the percentile-based grade interpretation, where a score of 80.3 or higher
                           corresponds to Grade A, and a score below 51 corresponds to Grade E.

                           Table 8. SUS questions.

                            No.      Question
                              1      I think that I would like to use this system frequently.
                              2      I found the system unnecessarily complex.
                              3      I thought the system was easy to use.
                              4      I think that I would need the support of a technical person to be able to use this system.
                              5      I found the various functions in this system were well integrated.
                              6      I thought there was too much inconsistency in this system.
                              7      I would imagine that most people would learn to use this system very quickly.
                              8      I found the system very cumbersome to use.
                              9      I felt very confident using the system.
                             10      I needed to learn a lot of things before I could get going with this system.




                                                                                             https://doi.org/10.3390/info17010065
Information 2026, 17, 65                                                                                                 18 of 33



                           Table 9. Acceptability SUS ranges for user satisfaction levels.

                                        SUS Score Range                     Interpretation
                                               0–50.9                       Not acceptable
                                              51–70.9                       Marginal
                                              71–100                        Acceptable


                           Table 10. SUS percentile rank interpretation.

                                     Grade               Score Range
                                        A                Score ≥ 80.3
                                        B                74 ≤ Score < 80.3
                                        C                68 ≤ Score < 74
                                        D                51 ≤ Score < 68
                                        E                Score < 51


                           7. Evaluation Results
                               In this section, we present a comprehensive evaluation of the proposal, focusing
                           on the AI model’s performance and its feasibility for the self-study of SQL query by
                           novice students.

                           7.1. Generative AI-Assisted SQL Query Generator Evaluation Results
                                 Our evaluation focuses on six key metrics. They include Sensibleness, Novelty, Topi-
                           cality: Concept, Topicality: Extras, Readiness: Answer, and Readiness: Runnability. These
                           indicators measure the logical accuracy, creativity, topical relevance, and technical correct-
                           ness of the generated SQL exercises.

                           7.1.1. Inter-Rater Reliability Results
                                To ensure the objectivity and reliability of the evaluation process, an IRR test was
                           conducted using Cohen’s Kappa (κ). This analysis measures the level of agreement between
                           two expert raters for each evaluation metric across a total sample of 220 assessments
                           (110 problems generated by each AI model). The results of the IRR analysis are summarized
                           in Table 11.

                           Table 11. Global Inter-Rater Reliability Results (n = 220).

                            Metric                        Cohen’s Kappa (κ)        Interpretation
                            Sensibleness                           0.86            Almost Perfect Agreement
                            Novelty                                0.91            Almost Perfect Agreement
                            Topicality: Concept                    1.00            Almost Perfect Agreement
                            Topicality: Extras                     0.85            Almost Perfect Agreement
                            Readiness: Answer                      0.87            Almost Perfect Agreement
                            Runnability (Objective)                0.72            Substantial Agreement


                                The IRR results, as summarized in Table 11, confirm a robust level of consistency
                           between the two expert raters. Based on the Table 6, five out of six metrics achieved an
                           “Almost Perfect Agreement” with Kappa coefficients (κ) ranging from 0.85 to 1.00.
                                The Topicality: Concept metric achieved a perfect Kappa score (κ = 1.00), indicating
                           complete agreement between the raters regarding the alignment of the generated problems
                           with the intended SQL concepts. The Novelty metric also demonstrated exceptionally
                           high consistency, with Kappa values of 0.91. These results confirm a highly synchronized
                           rater perception concerning the originality of the generated SQL queries. Metrics reflecting



                                                                                             https://doi.org/10.3390/info17010065
Information 2026, 17, 65                                                                                                   19 of 33



                           subjective stability, including Sensibleness (κ = 0.86), Topicality: Extras (κ = 0.85), and
                           Readiness: Answer (κ = 0.87), similarly maintained strong levels of agreement.
                                Interestingly, the Runnability metric yielded a Kappa score of 0.7, which is categorized
                           as “Substantial Agreement”. While still indicating a strong level of consensus, this lower
                           coefficient compared to other metrics suggests that identifying technical SQL errors—such
                           as subtle syntax mistakes or logical flaws—presented more room for interpretative differ-
                           ences between the raters. Nevertheless, the overall IRR results provide a highly reliable
                           foundation, ensuring that the performance comparisons between ChatGPT-5.0 and Gemini
                           3.0 Pro are substantiated by consistent expert judgment and minimal rater bias.
                                To ensure full transparency and allow for a granular review of the scoring pro-
                           cess, the detailed individual assessments from both expert raters are provided in the
                           Appendices A–H. Specifically, six separate tables are included in Appendices C–H, each
                           documenting the item-by-item scores for every evaluation metric used in this study.

                           7.1.2. Overall Performance Summary
                                This section presents a comprehensive comparison between ChatGPT-5.0 and Gemini
                           3.0 Pro based on subjective quality metrics and objective technical performance. The evalu-
                           ation was conducted on 110 SQL problems spanning 11 core learning topics (Table 7), with
                           the resulting mean scores (µ) and standard deviations (σ) summarized in Tables 12 and 13.
                           These data provide insights into the accuracy, consistency, and practical implementability
                           of both models as automated problem generation assistants.

                           Table 12. Comparison of Evaluation Scores between ChatGPT and Gemini.

                                                                 ChatGPT                               Gemini
                            Metric
                                                            µ                  σ                 µ                   σ
                            Sensibleness                  4.36               1.02              5.00                 0.00
                            Novelty                       1.27               0.47              1.86                 0.32
                            Topicality: Concept           4.36               1.21              5.00                 0.00
                            Topicality: Extras            2.95               0.15              4.68                 0.46
                            Readiness: Answer             4.41               0.92              5.00                 0.00


                           Table 13. Runnability Error Distribution Across 11 Learning Topics (n = 110).

                            Topic Index                    Gemini 3.0 Pro (Errors)             ChatGPT-5.0 (Errors)
                            Topic 1–5                                13.0                                  11.5
                            Topic 6–11                               22.0                                  18.0
                            Total Errors                             35.0                                 29.5
                            Mean Error per Topic                 3.18 ± 2.02                          2.68 ± 2.14


                                Based on the data presented in Tables 12 and 13, the following key insights summarize
                           the performance of ChatGPT-5.0 and Gemini 3.0 Pro:
                           1.   Subjective Quality and Consistency: Gemini 3.0 Pro demonstrates superior and
                                highly consistent performance across nearly all subjective metrics. This is evidenced
                                by a perfect mean score (µ = 5.00) in Sensibleness, Topicality: Concept, and Readiness:
                                Answer, with a standard deviation (σ) of 0.00. These results indicate that Gemini
                                3.0 Pro consistently produces logical, relevant, and classroom-ready SQL problems
                                without quality variance between iterations. In contrast, ChatGPT-5.0 exhibits higher
                                quality fluctuations, with σ values ranging from 0.15 to 1.21, suggesting its output is
                                less stable compared to Gemini 3.0 Pro.



                                                                                           https://doi.org/10.3390/info17010065
Information 2026, 17, 65                                                                                                  20 of 33



                           2.    Novelty and Instructional Integration: Both models achieved their lowest scores
                                 in Novelty (Gemini 3.0 Pro: 1.86; ChatGPT-5.0: 1.27), indicating that the generated
                                 problems tend to follow common SQL exercise patterns found in existing datasets.
                                 However, Gemini 3.0 Pro is significantly more effective at integrating additional
                                 instructional elements (Topicality: Extras) with a score of 4.68, whereas ChatGPT-
                                 5.0 only reached 2.95, highlighting ChatGPT-5.0’s limitations in following complex,
                                 specific instructions beyond the core concept.
                           3.    Technical Error Analysis (Runnability): Despite Gemini 3.0 Pro’s subjective su-
                                 periority, ChatGPT-5.0 demonstrates better technical performance in the objective
                                 Runnability metric. ChatGPT-5.0 produced fewer total errors (29.5) compared to
                                 Gemini 3.0 Pro (35.0) across all 11 learning topics. On average, ChatGPT-5.0 required
                                 2.68 corrections per topic, while Gemini 3.0 Pro required 3.18.
                           4.    Error Distribution per Topic: Both models showed an increase in technical errors as
                                 the topics progressed from basic (Topics 1–5) to advanced levels (Topics 6–11). This
                                 trend reflects the increased logic complexity in later SQL topics, such as advanced joins
                                 or subqueries, which remain challenging for generative AI models. While ChatGPT-
                                 5.0 had a lower total error count, its higher standard deviation (σ = 2.14) compared
                                 to Gemini 3.0 Pro (σ = 2.02) indicates sharper error spikes in specific complex topics.

                           7.2. Evaluation Results for SDP
                                 Table 14 summarizes the overall performance of the 32 participating students across
                           SDP instances 1–5. This table shows the number of students, the average correct answer
                           rate along with its standard deviation (SD), and the average number of answer submissions
                           with its corresponding SD. The results indicate that the average correct answer rate was
                           95.20%, suggesting that students were generally able to answer the questions accurately.
                           The average number of submissions was 1.56, implying that each student submitted
                           their answers for a given SDP instance approximately one or two times before achieving
                           full correctness.

                           Table 14. Summary of solution results across SDP instances.

                                Number of       Average Correct        Standard             Average            Standard
                                 Students       Answer Rate (%)        Deviation         Submission Time       Deviation
                                   32                 95.20               0.08                 1.56                0.82

                           7.2.1. Results for Individual SDP Instances
                               Figure 7 illustrates the average correct answer rate and the average number of answer
                           submissions by the 32 students for each SDP instance.
                           1.    Correct Answer Rate: Figure 7 indicates that the three instances ID = 1, ID = 3, and
                                 ID = 4 show a 100% correct answer rate. An instance ID = 2 shows 96.8%, and the
                                 lowest correct answer rate is 79.20% for the instance ID = 5. The interpretation of
                                 this statistic is that students were able to answer correctly and almost perfectly for the
                                 instances ID = 1–ID = 4 but experienced difficulty with the instance ID = 5.
                           2.    Submission Times: Four instances, IDs 1–4, have relatively stable submission times
                                 between 1.12 and 1.20. However, the instance ID = 5 reached 3.20. Students needed
                                 more attempts to answer correctly on the instance ID = 5. This score indicates a
                                 higher difficulty level compared to the previous instance IDs.
                                This result suggests a possible need for review or adjustment of the instance ID = 5,
                           both in terms of question complexity and clarity of instructions.




                                                                                            https://doi.org/10.3390/info17010065
Information 2026, 17, 65                                                                                              21 of 33




                           Figure 7. Average correct answer rates and submission times for each SDP instance.

                           7.2.2. Results for Individual Students
                               Figure 8 illustrates the average correct rates and the average number of answer sub-
                           missions of all the SDP instances for each of the 32 first-year students.
                           1.   Correct Answer Rate: Most students have a high correct answer rate, approaching
                                100%. The student with ID = 2 has the lowest correct answer rate at 84%. Some
                                students such as IDs 12, 19, 21, 24, are slightly below 100%. The remaining
                                students achieved a 100% correct answer rate. The statistics indicate that most students
                                are able to answer correctly on most trials, meaning they have a good understanding
                                of the material or questions.
                           2.   Submission Times: The average number of submissions ranged from 1.4 to 2.0,
                                meaning almost all students needed more than one attempt to obtain the correct
                                answer. Four students, IDs 6, 25, 29, 32, showed the highest submission times
                                of 2.0, indicating they needed more attempts to obtain the correct answer. Other
                                students achieved the correct answer after 1.4 and 1.6 times. The student ID = 32,
                                with a submission time of 2.0, was able to answer all questions correctly.
                                Students with high submission times will need additional support and/or guidance
                           to complete the questions on their early attempts.




                           Figure 8. Average correct answer rates and submission times for each student.


                                                                                          https://doi.org/10.3390/info17010065
Information 2026, 17, 65                                                                                                   22 of 33



                           7.2.3. SUS Evaluation Results
                                After solving the assignments, participants answered the 10 SUS questions listed in
                           Table 8. The detailed distribution of these responses is presented in Table 15. The results
                           indicate that the proposal was generally perceived as easy to use and well-designed. Minor
                           findings from the usability evaluation are summarized as follows:
                           1.   For the even-numbered statements (Q2, Q4, Q6, Q8, and Q10), the percentage of
                                agreement responses was 0%, indicating that respondents did not perceive the system
                                as complex or inconsistent, nor did they require technical assistance to use it.
                           2.   For the odd-numbered statements (Q1, Q3, Q5, Q7, and Q9), the percentage of positive
                                responses (including neutral) was 100%, suggesting that they found the answer
                                interface intuitive, easy to learn, and felt confident using it.

                           Table 15. Distribution of responses for questions. All values are expressed as percentages.

                            Response                Q1      Q2      Q3      Q4      Q5      Q6      Q7      Q8      Q9     Q10
                            Strongly Disagree       0.00   12.50    0.00   15.63    0.00   21.88    0.00   15.63   0.00     9.38
                            Disagree                0.00   71.88    0.00   68.75    0.00   56.25    0.00   68.75   0.00    68.75
                            Neutral                 9.38   15.63   18.75   15.63    9.38   21.88    9.38   15.63   31.25   21.88
                            Agree                  56.25   0.00    46.88   0.00    46.88    0.00   46.88    0.00   56.25    0.00
                            Strongly Agree         34.38   0.00    34.38   0.00    43.75    0.00   43.75    0.00   12.50    0.00


                                Figure 9 shows that the average System Usability Scale (SUS) score was 78, which
                           corresponds to Grade B within the Acceptable range as in Tables 9 and 10. This finding
                           indicates that students perceived the proposed SDP as usable and effective for learning
                           SQL programming.




                           Figure 9. SUS scores.

                           8. Discussion
                                In this section, we discuss findings, implications, and limitations of the proposal.

                           8.1. Performance of AI Models in Pedagogical Contexts
                                The comparison between Gemini 3.0 Pro and ChatGPT-5.0 reveals significant insights
                           into the suitability of LLMs for educational content generation. While both models were
                           capable of generating SQL exercises, Gemini 3.0 Pro exhibited superior performance in
                           terms of instructional alignment. The perfect scores in Sensibleness, Topicality, and Readi-
                           ness suggest that Gemini is more reliable for teachers who require stable and ready-to-use


                                                                                              https://doi.org/10.3390/info17010065
Information 2026, 17, 65                                                                                            23 of 33



                           exercises without extensive manual editing. ChatGPT-5.0, despite its technical efficiency,
                           occasionally required more refinement in its pedagogical logic. This finding aligns with the
                           growing consensus that different LLMs may excel in specific niches, with Gemini showing
                           promise in structured educational task generation.

                           8.2. Student Performance and the Learning Curve
                                The high average correct answer rate of 95.2%, coupled with a low submission average
                           of 1.56 per question, underscores the feasibility of the SDP in reducing cognitive load for
                           novice learners. These metrics suggest that the AI-generated descriptions provided suffi-
                           cient clarity, allowing students to navigate the logic of SQL without the typical frustrations
                           of syntax errors. By bridging the gap between conceptual intent (the ‘what’) and technical
                           execution (the ‘how’), the SDP method facilitates better ‘scaffolding’ in programming edu-
                           cation. This transition enables students to internalize relational logic more efficiently than
                           traditional methods, which often lack immediate, actionable feedback.

                           8.3. Usability and System Acceptance
                                The system achieved a System Usability Scale (SUS) score of 78, which classifies it within
                           the “Acceptable” and “Good” (Grade B) categories. This result is particularly significant
                           for an educational platform, as it demonstrates that the interface successfully minimizes
                           extraneous cognitive load. By reducing the complexity of platform navigation, the system
                           allows students to focus their full attention on mastering SQL logic. The positive feedback
                           from 32 students at INSTIKI indicates that the system is practical and ready to be used
                           more widely in university classes.

                           8.4. Reducing Pedagogical Overhead
                                One of the primary goals of this research was to alleviate the burden on teachers.
                           Traditional manual creation of SQL exercises—including schema design, data insertion,
                           and canonical query writing—is time-consuming. The AI-assisted generator, utilizing the
                           Spider dataset, automates this entire pipeline. This automation allows teachers to generate
                           a vast and diverse set of exercises in a short amount of time, enabling personalized learning
                           paths where different students can receive different sets of problems of similar difficulty
                           levels, thereby reducing the risk of academic dishonesty.
                                However, the higher submission rates in some instances (e.g., ID = 5) show that
                           question complexity and clarity still require fine-tuning. These findings confirm that
                           SDP successfully supports independent learning while preserving teacher oversight and
                           instructional control.

                           8.5. Limitations and Future Improvements
                                 Despite the positive results, this study has several limitations. The system currently
                           relies heavily on the quality of prompts provided to the LLMs, which can occasionally lead
                           to logical inconsistencies or “hallucinations” when generating complex multi-table joins.
                           Furthermore, the current assessment logic primarily uses an enhanced string-matching
                           approach; while suitable for the current scope, it may not capture all forms of semantic
                           equivalence in more advanced SQL queries. Additionally, this study is limited by the
                           absence of a control group and a pre-test/post-test comparison. Moreover, the sample
                           size of 32 students from a single institution is relatively small, which limits the statistical
                           power and generalizability of the findings. Consequently, the high correct answer rates and
                           positive user feedback should be interpreted as a preliminary validation of the system’s
                           usability and task completion capability rather than a direct measurement of learning gains
                           or long-term knowledge retention across diverse educational environments.




                                                                                        https://doi.org/10.3390/info17010065
Information 2026, 17, 65                                                                                                24 of 33



                                 To address these limitations and transition from this pilot study to full-scale educa-
                           tional implementation, we have outlined a comprehensive three-step roadmap.
                                 First, regarding system refinement, we will focus on enhancing the robustness of
                           our assessment by integrating semantic analysis techniques that can evaluate query logic
                           beyond simple textual comparison. We also aim to refine the user interface and develop a
                           more advanced AI-driven feedback mechanism to provide helpful hints for novice learners.
                                 Second, to address generalizability, we plan to conduct cross-semester and multi-
                           institutional longitudinal studies. This expansion will allow us to verify the system’s
                           robustness and evaluate how this method supports long-term knowledge retention among
                           students from diverse learning backgrounds.
                                 Finally, we aim to formally integrate the proposed method into the SQL programming
                           curriculum as a primary teaching tool. This will enable a comparative analysis of learning
                           outcomes against traditional teaching methods, thereby solidifying the system’s role in
                           standard computer science education.

                           9. Conclusions
                                 This paper presented the SQL Query Description Problem (SDP) as a novel exercise
                           type within the Programming Learning Assistant System (PLAS) to enhance the self-
                           regulated learning of SQL among novice students. To address the challenge of manual
                           content creation for instructors, we integrated a generative AI-assisted SQL query generator
                           utilizing the Spider dataset to automate the production of diverse and pedagogically
                           sound exercises.
                                 Our comparative evaluation of two leading LLMs—Gemini 3.0 Pro and ChatGPT-
                           5.0—revealed that while ChatGPT-5.0 demonstrated higher technical runnability with fewer
                           syntax errors, Gemini 3.0 Pro provided superior instructional alignment, achieving perfect
                           scores in Sensibleness, Topicality, and Readiness. These findings suggest that Gemini 3.0
                           Pro is currently more suitable for generating ready-to-use educational materials that require
                           minimal teacher intervention. The implementation of the system with 32 undergraduates
                           at INSTIKI further demonstrated the feasibility of the proposal. The SDP method is easy to
                           understand and helps students learn by providing a high average correct answer rate of
                           95.2% and a low submission frequency of 1.56 times per question. Moreover, the SUS score
                           of 78 (Grade B) confirms that students found the platform accessible and easy to use.
                                 In summary, the evaluation results from this pilot study confirm the technical feasibility
                           and usability of the proposed system, with students demonstrating high task completion
                           rates and positive engagement. However, to transition from this preliminary validation to
                           a broader educational application, further improvements are necessary. Future work will
                           focus on three key areas: refining the AI assessment logic to handle semantic variations,
                           conducting longitudinal studies across multiple institutions to verify generalizability, and
                           formally integrating the system into the SQL programming curriculum. These steps
                           will allow for a comprehensive comparative analysis of learning outcomes, ultimately
                           establishing the proposed method as a standard tool in computer science education.

                           Author Contributions: Conceptualization, N.W.W. and N.F.; methodology, N.W.W. and H.H.S.K.;
                           SDP application, N.W.W. and Z.Z.; AI Assistance Exercise Generator, Z.Z. and I.N.D.K.; visualization,
                           N.W.W. and P.S.; validation, N.W.W. and I.N.A.S.P.; writing—original draft, N.W.W.; writing—review
                           and editing, N.F.; supervision, N.F. All authors have read and agreed to the published version
                           of the manuscript.

                           Funding: This research received no external funding.




                                                                                            https://doi.org/10.3390/info17010065
Information 2026, 17, 65                                                                                                                25 of 33



                             Institutional Review Board Statement: This study was conducted following the ethical guidelines of
                             the Indonesian Institute of Business and Technology (INSTIKI). Formal approval from the Institutional
                             Review Board was not required because the research involved normal educational practices and
                             anonymized academic performance data, posing no risks to participants.

                             Informed Consent Statement: Informed consent was implied through voluntary participation in
                             the programming exercises. All participants were informed that their anonymized performance data
                             would be used for research purposes.

                             Data Availability Statement: The raw data supporting the conclusions of this article will be made
                             available by the authors upon request.

                             Acknowledgments: We would like to thank all the colleagues in the Distributing System Laboratory
                             at Okayama University and the Department of Informatics Engineering at the Indonesian Institute of
                             Business and Techonology (INSTIKI) who participated in this study.

                             Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

                             Appendix A. Keyword and Question List
                             Table A1. Keyword and question list.

  No            Keyword    Question
   1            SELECT     Write a query to select all columns from the student table.
   2           DISTINCT    Write a query to select distinct course titles (title) from the course table, excluding courses in the Mechanical
                           Engineering department.
   3            UPDATE     Write a query to update the salary of the instructor with ID = ‘63395’ to 100,000.
   4            WHERE      Write a query to update both the salary and dept_name for the instructor with ID = ‘78699’.
   5            INSERT     Write a query to insert a new student named John Doe with ID = ‘12345’ and tot_cred = 30 into the student
                           table.
   6            DELETE     Write a query to delete the student with ID = ‘12345’ from the student table.
   7          INNER JOIN   Write a query to get the names of instructors and the titles of the courses they teach, using the instructor and
                           course tables.
   8           LEFT JOIN   Write a query to get the names of all students and the titles of the courses they have taken, including students who
                           have not enrolled in any courses.
  9          GROUP BY      Write a query to group instructors by department and display the total salary per department.
  10          ORDER BY     Write a query to list all instructors ordered by salary in ascending order.
  11           UPPER       Write a query to display all student names in uppercase letters from the student table.
  12           LOWER       Write a query to display all instructor names in lowercase letters from the instructor table.
  13          CONCAT       Write a query to combine first_name and last_name of students into a single column named full_name.
  14         SUBSTRING     Write a query to extract the first 5 characters of the name column from the student table.
  15            TRIM       Write a query to remove leading and trailing spaces from the name column in the student table.
  16          REPLACE      Write a query to replace all occurrences of the letter “a” with “o” in the name column of the student table.
  17            RPAD       Write a query to pad the name column of all students to a total length of 15 characters, adding spaces to the right.
  18            LEFT       Write a query to extract the first 3 characters from the name column of the student table.
  19           RIGHT       Write a query to extract the last 3 characters from the name column of the student table.
  20           ROUND       Write a query to round the salary of all instructors to two decimal places.
  21           FLOOR       Write a query to get the salary of all instructors rounded down to the nearest integer.
  22            SUM        Write a query to calculate the total salary for each department using the instructor table.
  23           COUNT       Write a query to count the number of students enrolled in each course, using the student and takes tables.
  24            MOD        Write a query to find the remainder when the budget of each department is divided by 100000.
  25            MIN        Write a query to find the minimum budget in the department table.
  26            MAX        Write a query to find the highest salary in the instructor table.
  27       CURRENT_DATE    Write a query to select all courses and add a column showing the current date.
  28            YEAR       Write a query to extract the year from the year column in the section table.
  29           MONTH       Write a query to extract the month from the semester column of the section table, assuming the format ’YYYY-MM’.
  30             ASC       Write a query to list all students ordered by their name in ascending order.
  31            DESC       Write a query to list all instructors ordered by their salary in descending order.




                                                                                                        https://doi.org/10.3390/info17010065
Information 2026, 17, 65                                                                                             26 of 33



                           Appendix B. Database Schema College_2

                           Listing A1. University database schema.
                           CREATE TABLE classroom (
                           building    VARCHAR (15) ,
                           room_number VARCHAR (7) ,
                           capacity    NUMERIC (4 ,0) ,
                           PRIMARY KEY ( building , room_number )
                           );

                           CREATE TABLE department (
                           dept_name   VARCHAR (20) ,
                           building    VARCHAR (15) ,
                           budget     NUMERIC (12 ,2) CHECK ( budget > 0) ,
                           PRIMARY KEY ( dept_name )
                           );

                           CREATE TABLE course (
                           course_id   VARCHAR (8) ,
                           title     VARCHAR (50) ,
                           dept_name   VARCHAR (20) NULL ,
                           credits    NUMERIC (2 ,0) CHECK ( credits > 0) ,
                           PRIMARY KEY ( course_id ) ,
                           FOREIGN KEY ( dept_name ) REFERENCES department ( dept_name )
                           ON DELETE SET NULL
                           );

                           CREATE TABLE instructor (
                           ID        VARCHAR (5) ,
                           name       VARCHAR (20) NOT NULL ,
                           dept_name    VARCHAR (20) ,
                           salary      NUMERIC (8 ,2) CHECK ( salary > 29000) ,
                           PRIMARY KEY ( ID ) ,
                           FOREIGN KEY ( dept_name ) REFERENCES department ( dept_name )
                           ON DELETE SET NULL
                           );

                           CREATE TABLE section (
                           course_id      VARCHAR (8) ,
                           sec_id       VARCHAR (8) ,
                           semester       VARCHAR (6) CHECK ( semester IN ( ’ Fall ’ , ’ Winter ’ , ’ Spring ’ , ’
                                Summer ’) ) ,
                           year        NUMERIC (4 ,0) CHECK ( year > 1701 AND year < 2100) ,
                           building       VARCHAR (15) ,
                           room_number VARCHAR (7) ,
                           time_slot_id VARCHAR (4) ,
                           PRIMARY KEY ( course_id , sec_id , semester , year ) ,
                           FOREIGN KEY ( course_id ) REFERENCES course ( course_id )
                           ON DELETE CASCADE ,
                           FOREIGN KEY ( building , room_number ) REFERENCES classroom ( building ,
                                room_number )
                           ON DELETE SET NULL
                           );

                           CREATE TABLE teaches (
                           ID        VARCHAR (5) ,
                           course_id     VARCHAR (8) ,
                           sec_id      VARCHAR (8) ,
                           semester      VARCHAR (6) ,
                           year       NUMERIC (4 ,0) ,
                           PRIMARY KEY ( ID , course_id , sec_id , semester , year ) ,
                           FOREIGN KEY ( course_id , sec_id , semester , year ) REFERENCES section ( course_id
                                , sec_id , semester , year )



                                                                                        https://doi.org/10.3390/info17010065
Information 2026, 17, 65                                                                                     27 of 33



                           ON DELETE CASCADE ,
                           FOREIGN KEY ( ID ) REFERENCES instructor ( ID )
                           ON DELETE CASCADE
                           );

                           CREATE TABLE student (
                           ID        VARCHAR (5) ,
                           name       VARCHAR (20) NOT NULL ,
                           dept_name    VARCHAR (20) ,
                           tot_cred     NUMERIC (3 ,0) CHECK ( tot_cred >= 0) ,
                           PRIMARY KEY ( ID ) ,
                           FOREIGN KEY ( dept_name ) REFERENCES department ( dept_name )
                           ON DELETE SET NULL
                           );

                           CREATE TABLE takes (
                           ID        VARCHAR (5) ,
                           course_id     VARCHAR (8) ,
                           sec_id      VARCHAR (8) ,
                           semester      VARCHAR (6) ,
                           year       NUMERIC (4 ,0) ,
                           grade      VARCHAR (2) ,
                           PRIMARY KEY ( ID , course_id , sec_id , semester , year ) ,
                           FOREIGN KEY ( course_id , sec_id , semester , year ) REFERENCES section ( course_id
                                , sec_id , semester , year )
                           ON DELETE CASCADE ,
                           FOREIGN KEY ( ID ) REFERENCES student ( ID )
                           ON DELETE CASCADE
                           );

                           CREATE TABLE advisor (
                           s_ID      VARCHAR (5) ,
                           i_ID      VARCHAR (5) ,
                           PRIMARY KEY ( s_ID ) ,
                           FOREIGN KEY ( i_ID ) REFERENCES instructor ( ID )
                           ON DELETE SET NULL ,
                           FOREIGN KEY ( s_ID ) REFERENCES student ( ID )
                           ON DELETE CASCADE
                           );

                           CREATE TABLE time_slot (
                           time_slot_id VARCHAR (4) ,
                           day       VARCHAR (1) ,
                           start_hr     NUMERIC (2) CHECK ( start_hr >= 0 AND start_hr < 24) ,
                           start_min    NUMERIC (2) CHECK ( start_min >= 0 AND start_min < 60) ,
                           end_hr      NUMERIC (2) CHECK ( end_hr >= 0 AND end_hr < 24) ,
                           end_min     NUMERIC (2) CHECK ( end_min >= 0 AND end_min < 60) ,
                           PRIMARY KEY ( time_slot_id , day , start_hr , start_min )
                           );

                           CREATE TABLE prereq (
                           course_id   VARCHAR (8) ,
                           prereq_id   VARCHAR (8) ,
                           PRIMARY KEY ( course_id , prereq_id ) ,
                           FOREIGN KEY ( course_id ) REFERENCES course ( course_id )
                           ON DELETE CASCADE ,
                           FOREIGN KEY ( prereq_id ) REFERENCES course ( course_id )
                           );




                                                                                 https://doi.org/10.3390/info17010065
Information 2026, 17, 65                                                                                               28 of 33



                           Appendix C. Additional Sensibleness Evaluation Results
                           Table A2. Detailed sensibleness scores of AI models across learning topics, independently evaluated
                           by two human raters. Inter-rater reliability was assessed using Cohen’s κ, and average scores are
                           reported for completeness.

                            Topic                    AI Model                 Rater 1 Score           Rater 2 Score
                                                     GPT-5.0                  5                       5
                            Topic 1
                                                     Gemini 3.0 Pro           5                       5
                                                     GPT-5.0                  5                       5
                            Topic 2
                                                     Gemini 3.0 Pro           5                       5
                                                     GPT-5.0                  5                       5
                            Topic 3
                                                     Gemini 3.0 Pro           5                       5
                                                     GPT-5.0                  4                       4
                            Topic 4
                                                     Gemini 3.0 Pro           5                       5
                                                     GPT-5.0                  5                       5
                            Topic 5
                                                     Gemini 3.0 Pro           5                       5
                                                     GPT-5.0                  4                       4
                            Topic 6
                                                     Gemini 3.0 Pro           5                       5
                                                     GPT-5.0                  5                       5
                            Topic 7
                                                     Gemini 3.0 Pro           5                       5
                                                     GPT-5.0                  3                       4
                            Topic 8
                                                     Gemini 3.0 Pro           5                       5
                                                     GPT-5.0                  5                       5
                            Topic 9
                                                     Gemini 3.0 Pro           5                       5
                                                     GPT-5.0                  2                       2
                            Topic 10
                                                     Gemini 3.0 Pro           5                       5
                                                     GPT-5.0                  5                       5
                            Topic 11
                                                     Gemini 3.0 Pro           5                       5
                            Inter-rater Reliability (Cohen’s κ)                               κ ≈ 0.856209


                           Appendix D. Additional Novelty Evaluation Results
                           Table A3. Detailed novelty scores of AI models across learning topics, independently evaluated
                           by two human raters. Inter-rater reliability was assessed using Cohen’s κ, and average scores are
                           reported for completeness.

                            Topic Average Score       AI Model                Rater 1 Score            Rater 2 Score
                                                      GPT-5.0                 1                        1
                            Topic 1
                                                      Gemini 3.0 Pro          1                        2
                                                      GPT-5.0                 1                        1
                            Topic 2
                                                      Gemini 3.0 Pro          1                        1
                                                      GPT-5.0                 1                        1
                            Topic 3
                                                      Gemini 3.0 Pro          2                        2
                                                      GPT-5.0                 2                        2
                            Topic 4
                                                      Gemini 3.0 Pro          2                        2
                                                      GPT-5.0                 2                        2
                            Topic 5
                                                      Gemini 3.0 Pro          2                        2




                                                                                           https://doi.org/10.3390/info17010065
Information 2026, 17, 65                                                                                               29 of 33



                           Table A3. Cont.

                            Topic Average Score       AI Model                Rater 1 Score            Rater 2 Score
                                                      GPT-5.0                 1                        1
                            Topic 6
                                                      Gemini 3.0 Pro          2                        2
                                                      GPT-5.0                 1                        1
                            Topic 7
                                                      Gemini 3.0 Pro          2                        2
                                                      GPT-5.0                 2                        2
                            Topic 8
                                                      Gemini 3.0 Pro          2                        2
                                                      GPT-5.0                 1                        1
                            Topic 9
                                                      Gemini 3.0 Pro          2                        2
                                                      GPT-5.0                 1                        1
                            Topic 10
                                                      Gemini 3.0 Pro          2                        2
                                                      GPT-5.0                 1                        1
                            Topic 11
                                                      Gemini 3.0 Pro          2                        2
                            Inter-rater Reliability (Cohen’s κ)                                κ ≈ 0.9091


                           Appendix E. Additional Topicality: Concept/Keyword Evaluation Results
                           Table A4. Detailed topicality: concept/keyword scores of AI models across learning topics, inde-
                           pendently evaluated by two human raters. Inter-rater reliability was assessed using Cohen’s κ, and
                           average scores are reported for completeness.

                            Topic                  AI Model                       Rater 1 Score             Rater 2 Score
                                                   GPT-5.0                             5                          5
                            Topic 1
                                                   Gemini 3.0 Pro                      5                          5
                                                   GPT-5.0                             5                          5
                            Topic 2
                                                   Gemini 3.0 Pro                      5                          5
                                                   GPT-5.0                             5                          5
                            Topic 3
                                                   Gemini 3.0 Pro                      5                          5
                                                   GPT-5.0                             5                          5
                            Topic 4
                                                   Gemini 3.0 Pro                      5                          5
                                                   GPT-5.0                             5                          5
                            Topic 5
                                                   Gemini 3.0 Pro                      5                          5
                                                   GPT-5.0                             5                          5
                            Topic 6
                                                   Gemini 3.0 Pro                      5                          5
                                                   GPT-5.0                             2                          2
                            Topic 7
                                                   Gemini 3.0 Pro                      5                          5
                                                   GPT-5.0                             2                          2
                            Topic 8
                                                   Gemini 3.0 Pro                      5                          5
                                                   GPT-5.0                             5                          5
                            Topic 9
                                                   Gemini 3.0 Pro                      5                          5
                                                   GPT-5.0                             5                          5
                            Topic 10
                                                   Gemini 3.0 Pro                      5                          5
                                                   GPT-5.0                             4                          4
                            Topic 11
                                                   Gemini 3.0 Pro                      5                          5
                            Inter-rater Reliability (Cohen’s κ)                                   κ ≈ 1.0




                                                                                           https://doi.org/10.3390/info17010065
Information 2026, 17, 65                                                                                             30 of 33



                           Appendix F. Additional Topicality: extras Evaluation Results
                           Table A5. Detailed Topicality: extras scores of AI models across learning topics, independently
                           evaluated by two human raters. Inter-rater reliability was assessed using Cohen’s κ, and average
                           scores are reported for completeness.

                            Topic                 AI Model                     Rater 1 Score              Rater 2 Score
                                                  GPT-5.0                            3                          3
                            Topic 1
                                                  Gemini 3.0 Pro                     5                          5
                                                  GPT-5.0                            3                          3
                            Topic 2
                                                  Gemini 3.0 Pro                     4                          4
                                                  GPT-5.0                            2                          3
                            Topic 3
                                                  Gemini 3.0 Pro                     5                          5
                                                  GPT-5.0                            3                          3
                            Topic 4
                                                  Gemini 3.0 Pro                     4                          5
                                                  GPT-5.0                            3                          3
                            Topic 5
                                                  Gemini 3.0 Pro                     5                          5
                                                  GPT-5.0                            3                          3
                            Topic 6
                                                  Gemini 3.0 Pro                     4                          4
                                                  GPT-5.0                            3                          3
                            Topic 7
                                                  Gemini 3.0 Pro                     5                          5
                                                  GPT-5.0                            3                          3
                            Topic 8
                                                  Gemini 3.0 Pro                     5                          5
                                                  GPT-5.0                            3                          3
                            Topic 9
                                                  Gemini 3.0 Pro                     5                          5
                                                  GPT-5.0                            3                          3
                            Topic 10
                                                  Gemini 3.0 Pro                     4                          4
                                                  GPT-5.0                            3                          3
                            Topic 11
                                                  Gemini 3.0 Pro                     5                          5
                            Inter-rater Reliability (Cohen’s κ)                                κ ≈ 0.85


                           Appendix G. Additional Readiness: Answers Evaluation Results
                           Table A6. Detailed Readiness: answers scores of AI models across learning topics, independently
                           evaluated by two human raters. Inter-rater reliability was assessed using Cohen’s κ, and average
                           scores are reported for completeness.

                            Topic                 AI Model                     Rater 1 Score              Rater 2 Score
                                                  GPT-5.0                            5                          5
                            Topic 1
                                                  Gemini 3.0 Pro                     5                          5
                                                  GPT-5.0                            5                          5
                            Topic 2
                                                  Gemini 3.0 Pro                     5                          5
                                                  GPT-5.0                            5                          5
                            Topic 3
                                                  Gemini 3.0 Pro                     5                          5
                                                  GPT-5.0                            4                          5
                            Topic 4
                                                  Gemini 3.0 Pro                     5                          5
                                                  GPT-5.0                            5                          5
                            Topic 5
                                                  Gemini 3.0 Pro                     5                          5




                                                                                         https://doi.org/10.3390/info17010065
Information 2026, 17, 65                                                                                               31 of 33



                           Table A6. Cont.

                            Topic                  AI Model                      Rater 1 Score               Rater 2 Score
                                                   GPT-5.0                             4                          4
                            Topic 6
                                                   Gemini 3.0 Pro                      5                          5
                                                   GPT-5.0                             5                          5
                            Topic 7
                                                   Gemini 3.0 Pro                      5                          5
                                                   GPT-5.0                             5                          5
                            Topic 8
                                                   Gemini 3.0 Pro                      5                          5
                                                   GPT-5.0                             4                          4
                            Topic 9
                                                   Gemini 3.0 Pro                      5                          5
                                                   GPT-5.0                             2                          2
                            Topic 10
                                                   Gemini 3.0 Pro                      5                          5
                                                   GPT-5.0                             4                          4
                            Topic 11
                                                   Gemini 3.0 Pro                      5                          5
                            Inter-rater Reliability (Cohen’s κ)                                  κ ≈ 0.867


                           Appendix H. Additional Readiness: Runnability Evaluation Results
                           Table A7. Detailed Readiness: runnability scores of AI models across learning topics, independently
                           evaluated by two human raters. Inter-rater reliability was assessed using Cohen’s κ, and average
                           scores are reported for completeness.

                            Topic                  AI Model                      Rater 1 Score               Rater 2 Score
                                                   GPT-5.0                             1                          1
                            Topic 1
                                                   Gemini 3.0 Pro                      1                          1
                                                   GPT-5.0                             0                          0
                            Topic 2
                                                   Gemini 3.0 Pro                      2                          2
                                                   GPT-5.0                             7                          6
                            Topic 3
                                                   Gemini 3.0 Pro                      4                          4
                                                   GPT-5.0                             2                          2
                            Topic 4
                                                   Gemini 3.0 Pro                      4                          4
                                                   GPT-5.0                             2                          2
                            Topic 5
                                                   Gemini 3.0 Pro                      2                          2
                                                   GPT-5.0                             3                          3
                            Topic 6
                                                   Gemini 3.0 Pro                      6                          5
                                                   GPT-5.0                             3                          3
                            Topic 7
                                                   Gemini 3.0 Pro                      4                          4
                                                   GPT-5.0                             4                          3
                            Topic 8
                                                   Gemini 3.0 Pro                      8                          7
                                                   GPT-5.0                             1                          1
                            Topic 9
                                                   Gemini 3.0 Pro                      2                          2
                                                   GPT-5.0                             7                          6
                            Topic 10
                                                   Gemini 3.0 Pro                      2                          2
                                                   GPT-5.0                             1                          1
                            Topic 11
                                                   Gemini 3.0 Pro                      1                          1
                            Inter-rater Reliability (Cohen’s κ)                                  κ ≈ 0.724




                                                                                           https://doi.org/10.3390/info17010065
Information 2026, 17, 65                                                                                                        32 of 33



References
1.    Rahmalan, H.; Ahmad, S.S.S.; Affendey, L.S. Investigation on Designing a Fun and Interactive Learning Approach for Database
      Programming Subject According to Students’ Preferences. J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 2020, 1529, 022076. [CrossRef]
2.    Tung, S.H.; Lin, T.T.; Lin, Y.H. An Exercise Management System for Teaching Programming. J. Softw. 2013, 8, 1718–1725.
      [CrossRef]
3.    Garner, P.; Mariani, J. Learning SQL in Steps. Learning 2015, 12, 23.
4.    Migler, A.; Dekhtyar, A. Mapping the SQL Learning Process in Introductory Database Courses. In Proceedings of the 51st
      ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education (SIGCSE ’20), Portland, OR, USA, 11–14 March 2020; pp. 619–625.
      [CrossRef]
5.    Carbone, A.; Hurst, J.; Mitchell, I.; Gunstone, D. An Exploration of Internal Factors Influencing Student Learning of Programming.
      In Proceedings of the Eleventh Australasian Conference on Computing Education (ACE ’09), Wellington, New Zealand, 1 January
      2009; Volume 95, pp. 25–33.
6.    Piteira, M.; Costa, C. Learning Computer Programming: Study of Difficulties in Learning Programming. In Proceedings of the
      2013 International Conference on Information Systems and Design of Communication (ISDOC ’13), Lisboa, Portugal, 11–12 July
      2013; pp. 75–80. [CrossRef]
7.    Ahadi, A.; Behbood, V.; Vihavainen, A.; Prior, J.; Lister, R. Students’ Syntactic Mistakes in Writing Seven Different Types of
      SQL Queries and Its Application to Predicting Students’ Success. In Proceedings of the 47th ACM Technical Symposium on
      Computing Science Education (SIGCSE ’16), Memphis, TN, USA, 2–5 March 2016; pp. 401–406. [CrossRef]
8.    Taipalus, T. The Effects of Database Complexity on SQL Query Formulation. J. Syst. Softw. 2020, 170, 110576. [CrossRef]
9.    Taipalus, T.; Perälä, P. What to Expect and What to Focus on in SQL Query Teaching. In Proceedings of the 50th ACM Technical
      Symposium on Computer Science Education (SIGCSE ’19), Minneapolis, MN, USA, 27 February 2019–2 March 2019; pp. 198–203.
      [CrossRef]
10.   Aerts, W.; Fletcher, G.; Miedema, D. A Feasibility Study on Automated SQL Exercise Generation with ChatGPT-3.5. In
      Proceedings of the 3rd International Workshop on Data Systems Education: Bridging Education Practice with Education Research
      (DataEd ’24), Santiago, Chile, 9 June 2024; pp. 13–19. [CrossRef]
11.   Yu, T.; Zhang, R.; Yang, K.; Yasunaga, M.; Wang, D.; Li, Z.; Ma, J.; Li, I.; Yao, Q.; Roman, S.; et al. Spider: A Large-Scale
      Human-Labeled Dataset for Complex and Cross-Domain Semantic Parsing and Text-to-SQL Task. In Proceedings of the 2018
      Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP 2018), Brussels, Belgium, 31 October–4 November
      2018; pp. 3911–3921. [CrossRef]
12.   OpenAI. Introducing GPT-5 . 2025. Available online: https://openai.com/index/introducing-gpt-5/ (accessed on 5 November 2025).
13.   Google DeepMind. Gemini 3.0 Pro. 2025. Available online: https://deepmind.google/models/gemini/pro/ (accessed on
      4 December 2025).
14.   Mitrovic, A. Learning SQL with a Computerized Tutor. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth SIGCSE Technical Symposium on
      Computer Science Education (SIGCSE ’98), Atlanta, GA, USA, 26 February–1 March 1998; pp. 307–311. [CrossRef]
15.   Akhuseyinoglu, K.; Hardt, R.; Barria-Pineda, J.; Brusilovsky, P.; Pollari-Malmi, K.; Sirkiä, T.; Malmi, L. A Study of Worked
      Examples for SQL Programming. In Proceedings of the Proceedings of the 27th ACM Conference on Innovation and Technology
      in Computer Science Education—Vol. 1 (ITiCSE 2022), Dublin, Ireland, 8–13 July 2022; pp. 82–88. [CrossRef]
16.   Luckin, R.; Holmes, W. Intelligence Unleashed: An Argument for AI in Education; Pearson: London, UK, 2016.
17.   Chen, L.; Chen, P.; Lin, Z. Artificial Intelligence in Education: A Review. IEEE Access 2020, 8, 75264–75278. [CrossRef]
18.   Baidoo-Anu, D.; Ansah, L.O. Education in the Era of Generative Artificial Intelligence (AI): Understanding the Potential Benefits
      of ChatGPT in Promoting Teaching and Learning. J. AI 2023, 7, 52–62. [CrossRef]
19.   Choi, W.C.; Chang, C.I. ChatGPT-5 in Education: New Capabilities and Opportunities for Teaching and Learning. Preprints
      2025, 1–16. [CrossRef]
20.   Pornphol, P.; Chittayasothorn, S. Verification of Relational Database Languages Codes Generated by ChatGPT. In Proceedings of
      the Proceedings of the 2023 4th Asia Service Sciences and Software Engineering Conference (ASSE ’23), Aizu-Wakamatsu, Japan,
      27–29 October 2023; ACM: New York, NY, USA, 2023; pp. 17–22. [CrossRef]
21.   Li, Z.; Xie, T. Using LLM to Select the Right SQL Query from Candidates. arXiv 2024, arXiv:2401.02115. [CrossRef]
22.   Gupta, M.S.; Kumar, N.; Rao, V. AI and Teacher Productivity: A Quantitative Analysis of Time-Saving and Workload Reduction
      in Education. In Proceedings of the Conference on Advancing Synergies in Science, Engineering, and Management (ASEM 2024),
      Virginia Beach, VA, USA, 6–9 November 2024; pp. 97–104.
23.   Hashem, R.; Ali, N.; El Zein, F.; Fidalgo, P.; Abu Khurma, O. AI to the Rescue: Exploring the Potential of ChatGPT as a Teacher
      Ally for Workload Relief and Burnout Prevention. Res. Pract. Technol. Enhanc. Learn. 2024, 19, 1–26. [CrossRef]
24.   Mason, R.; Seton, C.; Cooper, G. Applying Cognitive Load Theory to the Redesign of a Conventional Database Systems Course.
      Comput. Sci. Educ. 2016, 26, 68–87. [CrossRef]




                                                                                                    https://doi.org/10.3390/info17010065
Information 2026, 17, 65                                                                                                           33 of 33



25.   Yousoof, M.; Sapiyan, M.; Kamaluddin, K. Reducing Cognitive Load in Learning Computer Programming. World Acad. Sci. Eng.
      Technol. Int. J. Comput. Inf. Eng. 2007, 1, 3751–3754.
26.   Ma, L.; Zhang, X.; Wang, Z.; Luo, H. Designing Effective Instructional Feedback Using a Diagnostic and Visualization System:
      Evidence from a High School Biology Class. Systems 2023, 11, 364. [CrossRef]
27.   Sudo, K.; Watanuki, S.; Matsuoka, H.; Otake, E.; Yatomi, Y.; Nagaoka, N.; Iino, K. Effects of the Project on Enhancement of
      Teaching Skills in Gerontic Nursing Practice of Indonesian Nursing Lecturer and Clinical Nurse Preceptor. Glob. Health Med.
      2023, 5, 285–293. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
28.   Harvey, L., III; Aggarwal, A. Exploring the Effect of Quiz and Homework Submission Times on Students’ Performance in an
      Introductory Programming Course in a Flipped Classroom Environment. In Proceedings of the 2021 ASEE Virtual Annual
      Conference, Virtual, 26–29 July 2021; pp. 1–16. [CrossRef]
29.   Vaswani, A.; Shazeer, N.; Parmar, N.; Uszkoreit, J.; Jones, L.; Gomez, A.N.; Kaiser, Ł.; Polosukhin, I. Attention Is All You Need. In
      Proceedings of the Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA, 4–9 December
      2017; Volume 30.
30.   Rosca, C.M.; Stancu, A. Quality Assessment of GPT-3.5 and Gemini 1.0 Pro for SQL Syntax. Comput. Stand. Interfaces 2026,
      95, 104041. [CrossRef]
31.   Miedema, D.; Taipalus, T.; Aivaloglou, E. Students’ Perceptions on Engaging Database Domains and Structures. In Proceedings
      of the 54th ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education (SIGCSE 2023), Toronto, ON, Canada, 15–18 March 2023;
      Volume 1, pp. 122–128. [CrossRef]
32.   Funabiki, N.; Tana; Zaw, K.K.; Ishihara, N.; Kao, W.C. A Graph-Based Blank Element Selection Algorithm for Fill-in-Blank
      Problems in Java Programming Learning Assistant System. IAENG Int. J. Comput. Sci. 2017, 44, 247–260.
33.   Aung, S.T.; Funabiki, N.; Syaifudin, Y.W.; Kyaw, H.H.S.; Aung, S.L.; Dim, N.K.; Kao, W.C. A Proposal of Grammar-Concept
      Understanding Problem in Java Programming Learning Assistant System. J. Adv. Inf. Technol. (JAIT) 2021, 12, 342–350. [CrossRef]
34.   Lu, X.; Funabiki, N.; Kyaw, H.H.S.; Htet, E.E.; Aung, S.L.; Dim, N.K. Value Trace Problems for Code Reading Study in C
      Programming. Adv. Sci. Technol. Eng. Syst. J. (ASTESJ) 2022, 7, 14–26. [CrossRef]
35.   Institut Bisnis dan Teknologi Indonesia (INSTIKI). Modul Praktikum Basis Data Lanjut. 2022. Available online: https:
      //instiki.ac.id/wp-content/uploads/2022/02/Modul-Praktikum-Basis-Data-Lanjut.pdf (accessed on 28 August 2025).
36.   W3Schools. SQL Tutorial. 2025. Available online: https://www.w3schools.com/sql/ (accessed on 28 October 2025).
37.   Unal, E.; Çakir, H. Students’ Views about the Problem-Based Collaborative Learning Environment Supported by Dynamic Web
      Technologies. Malays. Online J. Educ. Technol. 2017, 5, 1–19.
38.   Lu, X.; Funabiki, N.; Naing, I.; Kyaw, H.H.S.; Ueda, K. A Proposal of Two Types of Exercise Problems for TCP/IP Programming
      Learning by C Language. In Proceedings of the IEICE Technical Report, Tokyo, Japan, 31 October 2023; NS2022-236; pp. 396–401.
39.   Sarsa, S.; Denny, P.; Hellas, A.; Leinonen, J. Automatic Generation of Programming Exercises and Code Explanations Using Large
      Language Models. In Proceedings of the 2022 ACM Conference on International Computing Education Research–(ICER ’22),
      Lugano, Switzerland, 7–11 August 2022; Volume 1, pp. 27–43. [CrossRef]
40.   Gwet, K.L. Handbook of Inter-Rater Reliability; STATAXIS Publishing Company: Gaithersburg, MD, USA, 2001.
41.   Cohen, J. A Coefficient of Agreement for Nominal Scales. Educ. Psychol. Meas. 1960, 20, 37–46. [CrossRef]
42.   Landis, J.R.; Koch, G.G. The Measurement of Observer Agreement for Categorical Data. Biometrics 1977, 33, 159–174. [CrossRef]
      [PubMed]
43.   Tullis, T.S.; Stetson, J.N. A Comparison of Questionnaires for Assessing Website Usability. In Proceedings of the Usability
      Professional Association Conference, Minneapolis, MN, USA, 7–11 June 2004; Volume 1, pp. 1–12.
44.   Brooke, J. SUS: A Quick and Dirty Usability Scale. In Usability Evaluation in Industry; Jordan, P.W., Thomas, B., Weerdmeester, B.A.,
      McClelland, A.L., Eds.; Taylor & Francis: London, UK, 1996; pp. 189–194.

Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.




                                                                                                      https://doi.org/10.3390/info17010065
